=pod

=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

Language::MuldisD::Core -
Muldis D core data types and operators

=head1 VERSION

This document is Language::MuldisD::Core version 0.15.0.

=head1 PREFACE

This document is part of the Muldis D language specification, whose root
document is L<Language::MuldisD>; you should read that root document
before you read this one, which provides subservient details.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Muldis D has a mandatory core set of system-defined (eternally available)
entities, which is referred to as the I<Muldis D core> or the I<core>; they
are the minimal entities that all Muldis D implementations need to provide;
they are mutually self-describing and are used to bootstrap the language;
any entities outside the core, called I<Muldis D extensions>, are
non-mandatory and are defined in terms of the core or each other, but the
reverse isn't true.

This current C<Core> document features the boolean, order, integer,
rational, bit string, and character string types and operators, plus the
tuple and relation type constructors (and quasi- variants) and operators,
plus the type system minimal and maximal types, plus the special types used
to define the system catalog, and the polymorphic operators that all types,
or some types including core types, have defined over them.

Extensions are in these other documents:
L<Language::MuldisD::Ext::Temporal>, L<Language::MuldisD::Ext::Spatial>.

=head1 TYPE SUMMARY

Following are all the data types and data type factories described in this
document, arranged in a type graph according to their proper sub|supertype
relationships:

    sys.Core.Universal.Universal

        sys.Core.Universal.Empty

        sys.Core.Scalar.Scalar
            sys.Core.Ordered.Ordered

                # The following are all regular ordered scalar types.

                sys.Core.Bool.Bool
                sys.Core.Int.Int
                    sys.Core.Int.UInt
                        sys.Core.Int.PInt
                sys.Core.Rat.Rat
                    sys.Core.Rat.URat
                        sys.Core.Rat.PRat
                    sys.Core.Rat.BRat
                    sys.Core.Rat.DRat
                sys.Core.Blob.Blob
                    sys.Core.Blob.NEBlob
                sys.Core.Text.Text
                    sys.Core.Text.NEText

        # The following are all nonscalar type factories.

        sys.Core.Tuple.Tuple
            sys.Core.Tuple.D0
            sys.Core.Tuple.SetElem
            sys.Core.Tuple.SeqElem
            sys.Core.Tuple.BagElem
            sys.Core.Tuple.Database

        sys.Core.Relation.Relation
            sys.Core.Relation.D0
            sys.Core.Relation.Set
                sys.Core.Relation.Maybe
            sys.Core.Relation.Seq
            sys.Core.Relation.Bag

        # The following are all quasi-nonscalar type factories.

        sys.Core.QuasiTuple.QuasiTuple
            sys.Core.QuasiTuple.D0
            sys.Core.QuasiTuple.QuasiSetElem
            sys.Core.QuasiTuple.QuasiSeqElem
            sys.Core.QuasiTuple.QuasiBagElem

        sys.Core.QuasiRelation.QuasiRelation
            sys.Core.QuasiRelation.D0
            sys.Core.QuasiRelation.QuasiSet
                sys.Core.QuasiRelation.QuasiMaybe
            sys.Core.QuasiRelation.QuasiSeq
            sys.Core.QuasiRelation.QuasiBag

        # The following are all remnant types.

        sys.Core.Remnant.ScaTupRel

Note that C<sys.Core.Universal.Empty> is a proper subtype of all of the
other types in this graph, but every other type has only one immediate
supertype shown, and hence the graph of them is a simple hierarchy.

These system-defined subtypes are specific to defining the system catalog,
more or less:

    sys.Core.Universal.Universal

        sys.Core.Universal.Empty

        sys.Core.Scalar.Scalar

            # The following is actually a union over many scalar types.

            sys.Core.Cat.ScalarLiteral

            sys.Core.Ordered.Ordered

                # The following are all regular ordered scalar types.

                sys.Core.Cat.Name
                sys.Core.Cat.NameChain
                sys.Core.Cat.FlattenedNameChain
                sys.Core.Cat.Order

                sys.Core.Int.Int
                    sys.Core.Int.UInt
                        sys.Core.Int.PInt

                            # These are all finite integer types.

                            sys.Core.Cat.PInt1_4
                            sys.Core.Cat.PInt2_N
                                sys.Core.Cat.PInt2_36

            # The following are all regular non-ordered scalar types.

            sys.Core.Cat.E_RM
            sys.Core.Cat.E_TK
            sys.Core.Cat.E_TDM
            sys.Core.Cat.E_ENK
            sys.Core.Cat.E_PSAK

        sys.Core.Tuple.Tuple

            # The following are all regular tuple types.

            sys.Core.Cat.RatRoundRule
            sys.Core.Cat.Type
            sys.Core.Cat.ExprNode
            sys.Core.Cat.InnerFunc
            sys.Core.Cat.Func
            sys.Core.Cat.UpdStmt
            sys.Core.Cat.InnerUpdater
            sys.Core.Cat.Updater
            sys.Core.Cat.ProcStmtArg
            sys.Core.Cat.ProcStmt
            sys.Core.Cat.InnerProc
            sys.Core.Cat.Proc
            sys.Core.Cat.Exception

        sys.Core.Relation.Relation

            # The following are all regular relation types.

            sys.Core.Cat.NameTypeMap
            sys.Core.Cat.NameExprMap
            sys.Core.Cat.AttrRenameMap
            sys.Core.Cat.ExprSet
                sys.Core.Cat.ExprTree
            sys.Core.Cat.InnerFuncSet
                sys.Core.Cat.InnerFuncTree
            sys.Core.Cat.MultiUpdStmt
            sys.Core.Cat.InnerUpdaterSet
                sys.Core.Cat.InnerUpdaterTree
            sys.Core.Cat.ProcStmtArgSet
            sys.Core.Cat.InnerProcTree

            sys.Core.Relation.Set

                # The following are all regular set types.

                sys.Core.Cat.SetOfName
                sys.Core.Cat.SetOfSetOfName
                sys.Core.Cat.SetOfNameExprMap
                sys.Core.Cat.SetOfNameChain

            sys.Core.Relation.Seq

                # The following are all regular sequence types.

                sys.Core.Cat.NESeqOfName
                sys.Core.Cat.SeqOfProcStmt

These system-defined subtypes are used as the declared types of some
parameters of some system-defined N-ary routines, but they are not used in
defining the system catalog itself; it is not anticipated that they would
be used for user data:

    sys.Core.Universal.Universal

        sys.Core.Universal.Empty

        sys.Core.Relation.Relation
            sys.Core.Relation.Set

                # The following are all nonscalar type factories.

                sys.Core.QuasiCat.SetOfTuple
                sys.Core.QuasiCat.SetOfRelation
                    sys.Core.QuasiCat.SetOfBag

                sys.Core.Relation.Maybe

                    # The following are all nonscalar type factories.

                    sys.Core.QuasiCat.MaybeOfTuple

            sys.Core.Relation.Seq

                # The following are all nonscalar type factories.

                sys.Core.QuasiCat.SeqOfSeq

            sys.Core.Relation.Bag

                # The following are all nonscalar type factories.

                sys.Core.QuasiCat.BagOfTuple
                sys.Core.QuasiCat.BagOfRelation

        sys.Core.QuasiRelation.QuasiRelation
            sys.Core.QuasiRelation.QuasiSet

                # The following are all quasi-nonscalar type factories.

                sys.Core.QuasiCat.QuasiSetOfTuple
                sys.Core.QuasiCat.QuasiSetOfRelation

These system-defined subtypes have also been defined for convenience, as
they are anticipated to be frequently used; moreover, many system-defined
routines use them as parameter declared types:

    sys.Core.Universal.Universal

        sys.Core.Universal.Empty

        sys.Core.Relation.Relation
            sys.Core.Relation.Set

                # The following are all regular set types.

                sys.Core.Spec.SetOfScalar
                    sys.Core.Spec.SetOfOrdered
                        sys.Core.Spec.SetOfBool
                        sys.Core.Spec.SetOfInt
                            sys.Core.Spec.SetOfUInt
                        sys.Core.Spec.SetOfRat
                        sys.Core.Spec.SetOfBlob
                        sys.Core.Spec.SetOfText

                sys.Core.Relation.Maybe

                    # The following are all regular maybe types.

                    sys.Core.Spec.MaybeOfScalar
                        sys.Core.Spec.MaybeOfOrdered
                            sys.Core.Spec.MaybeOfBool
                            sys.Core.Spec.MaybeOfInt
                                sys.Core.Spec.MaybeOfUInt
                            sys.Core.Spec.MaybeOfRat
                            sys.Core.Spec.MaybeOfBlob
                            sys.Core.Spec.MaybeOfText

            sys.Core.Relation.Seq

                # The following are all regular sequence types.

                sys.Core.Spec.SeqOfScalar
                    sys.Core.Spec.SeqOfOrdered
                        sys.Core.Spec.SeqOfBool
                        sys.Core.Spec.SeqOfInt
                            sys.Core.Spec.SeqOfUInt
                        sys.Core.Spec.SeqOfRat
                        sys.Core.Spec.SeqOfBlob
                        sys.Core.Spec.SeqOfText

            sys.Core.Relation.Bag

                # The following are all regular bag types.

                sys.Core.Spec.BagOfScalar
                    sys.Core.Spec.BagOfOrdered
                        sys.Core.Spec.BagOfBool
                        sys.Core.Spec.BagOfInt
                            sys.Core.Spec.BagOfUInt
                        sys.Core.Spec.BagOfRat
                        sys.Core.Spec.BagOfBlob
                        sys.Core.Spec.BagOfText

=head1 SYSTEM-DEFINED CORE MAXIMAL AND MINIMAL DATA TYPES

These core data types are special and are the only Muldis D types that are
neither scalar nor nonscalar nor quasi-nonscalar types.  They are all
system-defined and it is impossible for users to define more types of this
nature.

=head2 sys.Core.Universal.Universal

The C<Universal> type is the maximal type of the entire Muldis D type
system, and contains every value that can possibly exist.  Every other type
is implicitly a proper subtype of C<Universal>, and C<Universal> is
implicitly a union type over all other types.  Its default value is
C<Bool:false>.  The cardinality of this type is infinity.

=head2 sys.Core.Universal.Empty

The C<Empty> type is the minimal type of the entire Muldis D type system,
and is the only type that contains exactly zero values.  Every other type
is implicitly a proper supertype of C<Empty> and C<Empty> is implicitly an
intersection type over all other types.  It has no default value.  The
cardinality of this type is zero.

=head1 SYSTEM-DEFINED CORE SCALAR DATA TYPES

These core scalar data types are the most fundamental Muldis D types.  Each
one has zero possreps, and hence has no named components that can be
referenced.  Concrete Muldis D provides a specific syntax per type to
select a value of one of these types, which does not look like a routine
invocation, but rather like a scalar literal in a typical programming
language; details of that syntax are not given here, but in
L<Language::MuldisD::Grammar>.  Abstract Muldis D as hosted in another
language will essentially use literals of corresponding host language
types, whatever they use for eg booleans and integers and character
strings, but tagged with extra meta-data if the host language is more
weakly typed or lacks one-to-one type correspondence; see
L<Language::MuldisD::PerlHosted> for a Perl-based example.

=head2 sys.Core.Scalar.Scalar

The C<Scalar> type is the maximal type of all Muldis D scalar types, and
contains every scalar value that can possibly exist.  Every other scalar
type is implicitly a proper subtype of C<Scalar>, and C<Scalar> is
implicitly a union type over all other scalar types.  Its default value is
C<Bool:false>.  The cardinality of this type is infinity.

=head2 sys.Core.Ordered.Ordered

The C<Ordered> type is a proper subtype of C<Scalar> that is a proper
supertype of all scalar types that are considered ordered.  Any scalar
types which consider themselves ordered, which happens to include every
system-defined core scalar root type, will explicitly declare themselves as
subtypes of C<Ordered> in their type definitions; the definition of
C<Ordered> does not specify what other types it is a union over.  Its
default value is C<Bool:false>.  The cardinality of this type is infinity.

=head2 sys.Core.Bool.Bool

A C<Bool> is an enumeration consisting of the 2 values C<Bool:false> and
C<Bool:true>.  It represents a truth value, and is the result type of any
C<is_equal> or C<is_not_equal> routine; it is the only essential scalar
data type of a B<D> language.  Its default and minimum value is
C<Bool:false>; its maximum value is C<Bool:true>.  The cardinality of this
type is 2.

=head2 sys.Core.Int.Int

An C<Int> is a single exact integral number of any magnitude.  Its default
value is zero; its minimum and maximum values are conceptually infinities
and practically impossible.  The cardinality of this type is infinity; to
define a most-generalized finite C<Int> subtype, you must specify the 2
integer end-points of the inclusive range that all its values are in.

=head2 sys.Core.Int.UInt

A C<UInt> (unsigned / non-negative integer) is a proper subtype of C<Int>
where all member values are greater than or equal to zero.  Its minimum
value is zero.

=head2 sys.Core.Int.PInt

A C<PInt> (positive integer) is a proper subtype of C<UInt> where all
member values are greater than zero.  Its default and minimum value is 1.

=head2 sys.Core.Rat.Rat

A C<Rat> is a single exact rational number of any magnitude.  It is
conceptually a I<numerator> (C<Int>) divided by a I<denominator> (C<PInt>).
Its default value is zero; its minimum and maximum values are conceptually
infinities and practically impossible.  The cardinality of this type is
infinity; to define a most-generalized finite C<Rat> subtype, you must
specify the greatest magnitude value denominator, plus the the 2 integer
end-points of the inclusive range of the value numerator.  Common subtypes
specify that all denominators are positive powers of a particular I<radix>
(C<PInt>), where the radix is usually either 2 or 10; types such as these
will easily map exactly to common human or physical numeric
representations, so they tend to perform better.

=head2 sys.Core.Rat.URat

A C<URat> (unsigned / non-negative rational) is a proper subtype of C<Rat>
where all member values are greater than or equal to zero.  Its minimum
value is zero.

=head2 sys.Core.Rat.PRat

A C<PRat> (positive rational) is a proper subtype of C<URat> where all
member values are greater than zero.  Its default value is 1.

=head2 sys.Core.Rat.BRat

A C<BRat> (binary rational) is a proper subtype of C<Rat> where the radix
is 2; it is the best option to exactly represent rational numbers that are
conceptually binary or octal or hexadecimal.

=head2 sys.Core.Rat.DRat

A C<DRat> (decimal rational) is a proper subtype of C<Rat> where the radix
is 10; it is the best option to exactly represent rational numbers that are
conceptually the decimal numbers that humans typically work with.

=head2 sys.Core.Blob.Blob

A C<Blob> is an undifferentiated string of bits.  Its default and minimum
value is the empty string; its maximum value is an infinite-length string
and practically impossible.  The cardinality of this type is infinity; to
define a most-generalized finite C<Blob> subtype, you must specify a
maximum length in bits that the subtype's strings are.

=head2 sys.Core.Blob.NEBlob

A C<NEBlob> (non-empty blob) is a proper subtype of C<Blob> where its
length in bits must be at least 1; it can be any C<Blob> except for the
empty string.  Its default and minimum value is a single zero bit.

=head2 sys.Core.Text.Text

A C<Text> is a string of characters.  Its default and minimum value is the
empty string; its maximum value is an infinite-length string and
practically impossible.  Note that there is only one system-defined
character repertoire for C<Text> types, which is the newest Unicode
repertoire (5.0.0).  The cardinality of this type is infinity; to define a
most-generalized finite C<Text> subtype, you must specify a maximum length
in characters (that is, eg, in NFC graphemes) that the subtype's strings
are.

=head2 sys.Core.Text.NEText

A C<NEText> (non-empty text) is a proper subtype of C<Text> where its
length in characters must be more than zero; it can be any C<Text> except
for the empty string.  Its default value is a single "space" character; its
minimum value has one character, but which character that is depends on the
default or current collation.

=head1 SYSTEM-DEFINED CORE NONSCALAR PARAMETERIZED DATA TYPES

These are only called nonscalar data types in a loose sense, because by
themselves they are incomplete type definitions.  Actual nonscalar data
type definitions are derived from these by supplying the balance of the
type definitions, such as what their attributes are and/or what their
attribute types are.  Associated with these incomplete type definitions are
a set of system-defined routines that can be applied to values of any
actual nonscalar types derived from them; such are called I<generic
nonscalar operators>.  In the Muldis D type system, these incomplete
nonscalar types are defined as union types over all actual types derived
from them, and are proper supertypes of said.

Some actual nonscalar data types are system-defined, for use in defining
the Muldis D system catalog / meta-model (see further below in the current
document), and some others are system-defined for convenience since they
are the types of many core operators (see further below in the current
document), but all other actual nonscalar data types are user-defined.
Users can also define their own incomplete nonscalar data types that are
tuple or relation types.

=head2 sys.Core.Tuple.Tuple

The C<Tuple> type is the maximal type of all Muldis D tuple (nonscalar)
types, and contains every tuple value that could possibly exist.  A
C<Tuple> is an unordered heterogeneous collection of 0..N named attributes
(the count of attributes being its I<degree>), where all attribute names
are mutually distinct, and each attribute may be of distinct types; the
mapping of a tuple's attribute names and their declared data types is
called the tuple's I<heading>.  Its default value is the sole value of the
sole tuple data type that has zero attributes.  The cardinality of this
type is equal to the product of the number of permutations drawable from
the values of each of its attributes' declared data types; for a C<Tuple>
subtype to be finite, all of its attribute types must be.

=head2 sys.Core.Tuple.D0

A C<Tuple.D0> is a proper subtype of C<Tuple> that has zero attributes; its
cardinality is 1, and its only value is also the default value of C<Tuple>.

=head2 sys.Core.Tuple.SetElem

A C<SetElem> is a C<Tuple> with the same heading as C<Set>.

=head2 sys.Core.Tuple.SeqElem

A C<SeqElem> is a C<Tuple> with the same heading as C<Seq>.

=head2 sys.Core.Tuple.BagElem

A C<BagElem> is a C<Tuple> with the same heading as C<Bag>.

=head2 sys.Core.Tuple.Database

A C<Database> is a proper subtype of C<Tuple> where all of its attributes
are each of relation types or of database types (the leaves of this
recursion are all relation types); it is otherwise the same.  It is also
trivially a proper supertype of C<Tuple.D0>.

=head2 sys.Core.Relation.Relation

The C<Relation> type is the maximal type of all Muldis D relation
(nonscalar) types, and contains every relation value that could possibly
exist.  A C<Relation> is analogous to a set of 0..N tuples where all tuples
have the same heading (the degrees match and all attribute names and
corresponding declared data types match), but that a C<Relation> data type
still has its own corresponding heading (attribute names and declared data
types) even when it consists of zero tuples.  Its default value is the
zero-tuple value of the sole relation data type that has zero attributes.
Matters of its cardinality are generally the same as for C<Tuple>.  A
relation data type can also have (unique) keys each defined over a subset
of its attributes, which constrain its set of values relative to there
being no explicit keys, but having the keys won't turn an infinite relation
type into a finite one.

=head2 sys.Core.Relation.D0

A C<Relation.D0> is a proper subtype of C<Relation> that has 0 attributes;
its cardinality is 2, and its default value is the same as that of
C<Relation>.

=head2 sys.Core.Relation.Set

A C<Set> is a proper subtype of C<Relation> that has 1 attribute, and its
name is C<value>; it can be of any declared type.  A C<Set> subtype is
normally used by any system-defined N-ary operators where the order of
their argument elements or result is not significant, and that duplicate
values are not significant.  Its default value has zero tuples.  Note that,
for any given I<complete> Set subtype, C<Foo>, where its C<value> attribute
has a declared type of C<Bar>, the type C<Foo> can be considered the
I<power set> of the type C<Bar>.

=head2 sys.Core.Relation.Maybe

A C<Maybe> is a proper subtype of C<Set> that may have at most one element;
that is, it is a unary C<Relation> with a nullary key.  Operators that work
specifically with C<Maybe> subtypes can provide a syntactic shorthand for
working with sparse data; so Muldis D has something which is conceptually
close to SQL's nullable types without actually having 3-valued logic; it
would probably be convenient for code that round-trips SQL by way of Muldis
D to use the C<Maybe> type.  Its default value has zero tuples.

=head2 sys.Core.Relation.Seq

A C<Seq> is a proper subtype of C<Relation> that has 2 attributes, and
their names are C<index> and C<value>, where C<index> is a unary key and
its declared type is a C<UInt> subtype (C<value> can be non-unique and of
any declared type).  A Seq is considered dense, and all C<index> values in
one are numbered consecutively from 0 to 1 less than the count of tuples,
like array indices in typical programming languages.  A C<Seq> subtype is
normally used by any system-defined N-ary operators where the order of
their argument elements or result is significant (and duplicate values are
significant); specifically, C<index> defines an explicit ordering for
C<value>.  Its default value has zero tuples.

=head2 sys.Core.Relation.Bag

A C<Bag> (or I<multiset>) is a proper subtype of C<Relation> that has 2
attributes, and their names are C<value> and C<count>, where C<value> is a
unary key (that can have any declared type) and C<count> is a C<PInt>
subtype.  A C<Bag> subtype is normally used by any system-defined N-ary
operators where the order of their argument elements or result is not
significant, but that duplicate values are significant; specifically,
C<count> defines an explicit count of occurrences for C<value>, also known
as that value's I<multiplicity>.  Its default value has zero tuples.

=head1 SYSTEM-DEFINED CORE QUASI-NONSCALAR PARAMETERIZED DATA TYPES

These quasi-nonscalar incomplete data type definitions correspond to their
similarly-named (differing only by the C<Quasi>) nonscalar data types, and
their use is intended to be limited to the few situations where the
corresponding nonscalar data types can't be used.  It should be noted in
particular that there is no "QuasiDatabase" type, since all normal data or
catalog databases should be composed of normal relations only; but all of
the other nonscalar incomplete types have counterparts here.

=head2 sys.Core.QuasiTuple.QuasiTuple

A C<QuasiTuple> is like a C<Tuple> but that the declared types of its
attributes can be anything at all.  Its cardinality is infinite.

=head2 sys.Core.QuasiTuple.D0

A C<QuasiTuple.D0> is a proper subtype of C<QuasiTuple> in the
corresponding manner to C<Tuple.D0> being a proper subtype of C<Tuple>.
Its cardinality is 1.

=head2 sys.Core.QuasiTuple.QuasiSetElem

A C<QuasiSetElem> is a C<QuasiTuple> with the same heading as C<QuasiSet>.

=head2 sys.Core.QuasiTuple.QuasiSeqElem

A C<QuasiSeqElem> is a C<QuasiTuple> with the same heading as C<QuasiSeq>.

=head2 sys.Core.QuasiTuple.QuasiBagElem

A C<QuasiBagElem> is a C<QuasiTuple> with the same heading as C<QuasiBag>.

=head2 sys.Core.QuasiRelation.QuasiRelation

A C<QuasiRelation> is like a C<Relation> but that the declared types of its
attributes can be anything at all.  Its cardinality is infinite.

=head2 sys.Core.QuasiRelation.D0

A C<QuasiRelation.D0> is a proper subtype of C<QuasiRelation> in the
corresponding manner to C<Relation.D0> being a proper subtype of
C<Relation>.  Its cardinality is 2.

=head2 sys.Core.QuasiRelation.QuasiSet

A C<QuasiSet> is a proper subtype of C<QuasiRelation> in the corresponding
manner to C<Set> being a proper subtype of C<Relation>.  Its cardinality is
infinite.

=head2 sys.Core.QuasiRelation.QuasiMaybe

A C<QuasiMaybe> is a proper subtype of C<QuasiRelation> in the
corresponding manner to C<Maybe> being a proper subtype of C<Relation>.
Its cardinality is infinite.

=head2 sys.Core.QuasiRelation.QuasiSeq

A C<QuasiSeq> is a proper subtype of C<QuasiRelation> in the corresponding
manner to C<Seq> being a proper subtype of C<Relation>.  Its cardinality is
infinite.

=head2 sys.Core.QuasiRelation.QuasiBag

A C<QuasiBag> is a proper subtype of C<QuasiRelation> in the corresponding
manner to C<Bag> being a proper subtype of C<Relation>.  Its cardinality is
infinite.

=head1 SYSTEM-DEFINED REMNANT TYPES

These core data types are mainly for use with the definitions of some
polymorphic operators whose range of possibly acceptable values may be
mutually incompatible, and they aren't appropriate to group into other type
categories or namespaces.

=head2 sys.Core.Remnant.ScaTupRel

The C<ScaTupRel> type is a union type over C<Scalar>, C<Tuple> and
C<Relation>; it is mainly useful in describing the possible range of types
of attributes of scalar possreps or tuples or relations.  Its default value
is C<Bool:false>.

=head1 SYSTEM-DEFINED CORE CATALOG SCALAR DATA TYPES

These core scalar data types are more special-purpose in nature and are
intended for use in defining or working with the system catalog, which is
mainly composed of nonscalar types built using these.

=head2 sys.Core.Cat.ScalarLiteral

A C<Cat.ScalarLiteral> is a union type over all the system-defined scalar
types that are allowed to be used directly as hard-coded literal values in
Muldis D expressions; 'directly' meaning not by way of explicitly invoking
a selector function.  Generally speaking, this union type includes all of
the core scalar types that aren't themselves defined as union types.  The
full list that C<ScalarLiteral> unions is: C<Bool>, C<Int>, C<Rat>,
C<Blob>, C<Text>, C<Cat.Name>, C<Cat.NameChain>, C<Cat.Order>, C<Cat.E_RM>,
C<Cat.E_TK>, C<Cat.E_TDM>, C<Cat.E_ENK>, C<Cat.E_PSAK>.  Its default value
is C<Bool:false>.

=head2 sys.Core.Cat.Name

A C<Cat.Name> is a canonical short name for any kind of DBMS entity (or
named component) when declaring it; this short name is sufficient to
identify the entity within its immediate namespace.  Similarly, a DBMS
entity can often be invoked or referred to using just its C<Cat.Name>,
depending on the context; other times, a C<Cat.NameChain> must be used
instead to also qualify the reference with a namespace.  C<Cat.Name> is the
same as C<Text> in all ways but that it is specifically intended for use in
naming DBMS entities rather than being normal data.

=head2 sys.Core.Cat.NameChain

A C<Cat.NameChain> is a canonical long name for invoking or referring to a
DBMS entity, when its name needs to be qualified with a namespace.  A
C<Cat.NameChain> has 2 possreps; one possrep is a sequence of 1..N
C<Cat.Name> (represented by a C<Cat.NESeqOfName>), the 1..N elements being
ordered from parent-most to child-most component name; the other possrep is
a character string (represented by a C<Cat.FlattenedNameChain>) like when
the elements of the first possrep are catenated (in order with the first
element at the start of the string), with a period (C<.>) between the
parts, and each part escaped such that backslashes, single-quotes, and
periods are escaped as C<\b>, C<\q> and C<\p> respectively.

=head2 sys.Core.Cat.FlattenedNameChain

The C<Cat.FlattenedNameChain> type is used as the definition of the
character string possrep of a C<Cat.NameChain> (see that type for details);
while being a character string like C<Cat.Name>, the two are disjoint.

=head2 sys.Core.Cat.Order

A C<Cat.Order> is an enumeration consisting of the 3 values
C<Cat.Order:increase>, C<Cat.Order:same>, C<Cat.Order:decrease>.  It is the
result type of any C<comparison> routine that is used on 2 values of a
C<sys.Core.Ordered.Ordered> subtype.  Its default value is
C<Cat.Order:same>; its minimum and maximum values are, respectively,
C<Cat.Order:increase> and C<Cat.Order:decrease>.  The cardinality of this
type is 3.

=head2 sys.Core.Cat.PInt1_4

A C<Cat.PInt1_4> is a proper subtype of C<PInt> where all member values are
between 1 and 4.  Its maximum value is 4.  The cardinality of this type is
4.

=head2 sys.Core.Cat.PInt2_N

A C<Cat.PInt2_N> is a proper subtype of C<PInt> where all member values are
greater than 1.  Its default and minimum value is 2.

=head2 sys.Core.Cat.PInt2_36

A C<Cat.PInt2_36> is a proper subtype of C<Cat.PInt2_N> where all member
values are between 2 and 36.  (The significance of the number 36 is 10
digits plus 26 letters.)  Its maximum value is 36.  The cardinality of this
type is 35.

=head2 sys.Core.Cat.E_RM

A C<Cat.E_RM> (rounding method) is an enumeration consisting of the 5
values C<Cat.E_RM:half_up>, C<Cat.E_RM:to_even>, C<Cat.E_RM:to_floor>,
C<Cat.E_RM:to_ceiling>, C<Cat.E_RM:to_zero>.  When a value of some ordered
type needs to be mapped into a proper subtype that doesn't contain that
value, such as when mapping an arbitrary number to one with less precision,
some rounding method is applied to determine which value of the subtype is
to be mapped to while most accurately reflecting the original value.  The
C<Cat.E_RM> type enumerates the rounding methods that Muldis D operators
can typically apply.  With C<half_up> and C<to_even> (aka I<unbiased
rounding>, I<convergent rounding>, I<statistician's rounding>, or
I<bankers' rounding>), the original value will be mapped to the single
target value that it is closest to, if there is one; otherwise, if it is
exactly half-way between 2 adjacent target values, then C<half_up> will
round upwards, and C<to_even> will round towards the nearest "even" one.
With C<to_floor>, C<to_ceiling>, C<to_zero> (aka I<truncate>), the original
value will always be mapped to the single adjacent value that is lower than
it, or higher than it, or towards "zero" from it, respectively.  The
default value of C<Cat.E_RM> is C<Cat.E_RM:half_up>, since that is the most
commonly used method of rounding.

=head2 sys.Core.Cat.E_TK

A C<Cat.E_TK> (type kind) is an enumeration consisting of the 7 values
C<Cat.E_TK:special> (mainly for system-defined implicit supertypes),
C<Cat.E_TK:scalar>, C<Cat.E_TK:tuple>, C<Cat.E_TK:relation>,
C<Cat.E_TK:quasi_tuple>, C<Cat.E_TK:quasi_relation>, C<Cat.E_TK:remnant>.
Its default value is C<Cat.E_TK:scalar>.

=head2 sys.Core.Cat.E_TDM

A C<Cat.E_TDM> (type definition method) is an enumeration consisting of the
9 values C<Cat.E_TDM:special> (for some system-defined types that don't
best fit in other categories, and all parameterized types; users can not
define the latter for now), C<Cat.E_TDM:root> (complete root type defined
in terms of explicit attribute collection; all are fully defined, not
parameterized), C<Cat.E_TDM:restriction> (defined as "explicit other-type
where condition"), C<Cat.E_TDM:alias> (so the same one type can have
multiple names), C<Cat.E_TDM:(union|intersection|exclusion)> (defined as
explicit union|intersection|exclusion of other types),
C<Cat.E_TDM:difference> (defined as explicit difference of 2 other types),
C<Cat.E_TDM:negation> (defined as explicit negation of another type).  Its
default value is C<Cat.E_TDM:alias>.

=head2 sys.Core.Cat.E_ENK

A C<Cat.E_ENK> (expression node kind) is an enumeration consisting of the
10 values C<Cat.E_ENK:default> (default value of expression's declared
type), C<Cat.E_ENK:(scalar|tuple|relation|quasi_tuple|quasi_relation)>
(hard-coded literal scalar|tuple|relation|quasi-tuple|quasi-relation
value), C<Cat.E_ENK:param> (value of expression-containing function
parameter), C<Cat.E_ENK:upd_param> (on-entry value of expression-containing
update operator subject-to-update parameter), C<Cat.E_ENK:ro_param> (value
of expression-containing update operator read-only parameter),
C<Cat.E_ENK:func> (result of function invocation, or inlining of function
body).  Note that only C<upd_param> and C<func> (over C<upd_param>) can be
used for a subject-to-update argument of an update operator, but all of
these can be used elsewhere.  Its default value is C<Cat.E_ENK:scalar>.

=head2 sys.Core.Cat.E_PSAK

A C<Cat.E_PSAK> (procedural statement argument kind) is an enumeration
consisting of the 5 values C<Cat.E_PSAK:default> (default value of
argument's declared type), C<Cat.E_PSAK:upd_param> (current value of
statement-containing procedure subject-to-update parameter),
C<Cat.E_PSAK:ro_param> (value of statement-containing procedure read-only
parameter), C<Cat.E_PSAK:inner_var> (current value of statement-containing
procedure lexical variable, not param), C<Cat.E_PSAK:outer_var> (current
value of a non-lexical variable).  Note that only C<upd_param> and
C<(inner|outer)_var> can be used for a subject-to-update argument, but all
of these can be used with a read-only argument.  Its default value is
C<Cat.E_PSAK:ro_param>.

=head1 SYSTEM-DEFINED CORE CATALOG TUPLE DATA TYPES

These tuple data types, essentially all of the system-defined tuple types
are special-purpose in nature and are intended for use in defining or
working with the system catalog.  They are all completely defined types.

Note that many of these types might conceptually have C<name> attributes,
but those would actually be provided by any larger types in which they are
embedded, rather than by these types themselves.

Note that whenever an attribute of one of these types isn't significant,
given the context (determined by other attributes of the same type), and
should be ignored, its value is the default for its type.

I<To keep things simpler for now, most constraint definitions for these
types are missing, or just defined informally.>

=head2 sys.Core.Cat.RatRoundRule

A C<Cat.RatRoundRule> is a C<Tuple>.  It specifies a controlled (and
typically degrading) coercion of a real number into a rational number
having a specific radix and precision.  It is mainly used to
deterministically massage an operation, whose conceptual result is
generally an irrational number, so that its actual result is a best
approximating rational number.  It is also used to define a generic
rounding operation on a rational number that derives a typically less
precise rational.  A C<Cat.RatRoundRule> has these 3 attributes: C<radix>
(a C<Cat.PInt2_N>), C<max_denom> (a C<PInt>), and C<round_meth> (a
C<Cat.E_RM>).  The rational resulting from the operation is as close as
possible to the conceptual result but that its denominator is a
non-negative power of C<radix> and said denominator is not larger than
C<max_denom>; if rounding is needed, then C<round> dictates the rounding
method.  The default value of C<Cat.RatRoundRule> specifies a coersion to a
whole number using the C<Cat.E_RM:half_up> rounding method (its radix is 2
and its max denom is 1).

=head2 sys.Core.Cat.Type

A C<Cat.Type> is a C<Tuple>.  It defines a data type, which can either be
(sometimes) invoked directly for values, or be invoked by or embedded into
other type definitions.  C<Cat.Type> is used in the catalogs for defining
both system and user types (just the interfaces in the former case).

I<TODO:  The catalog types for type definitions need an overhaul.>

A C<Cat.Type> has these 7 attributes:

=over

=item C<tk> - C<Cat.E_TK>

This broadly declares what kind of type this is (eg,
scalar|tuple|relation); it partially says how to interpret the rest of the
attributes and/or which of them have significant values.

=item C<tdm> - C<Cat.E_TDM>

This is the type definition method for the type; it partially says how to
interpret the rest of the attributes and/or which of them have significant
values.  If C<tk> is C<Cat.E_TK:special>, then C<tdm> must be
C<Cat.E_TDM:special>; C<tdm> can be special at other times too.

=item C<types> - C<Cat.SetOfNameChain>

For some values of C<tdm>, the data type is defined at least partially in
terms of other data types not by way of attribute definitions, and then
C<types> lists all/most of those types.  Iff C<tdm> is C<Cat.E_TDM:alias>,
then the data type is just a symbolic reference for some other data type
(as far as the type system is concerned, they are the same data type,
invokable by an extra name), and C<types> has one element that is the name
of that type.  Iff C<tdm> is C<Cat.E_TDM:restriction>, then the data type
is defined as an explicit subtype of another type by way of an explicit
further type constraint applied to it, and C<types> has one element that is
the name of that supertype.  Iff C<tdm> is
C<Cat.E_TDM:(union|intersection|exclusion)>, then the data type is defined
as an explicit union|intersection|exclusion of N other types, and C<types>
lists their names, one per element; 2+ elements is the norm; just 1 element
means that the data type is a simple alias for the named element; zero
elements means the data type is a simple alias for, respectively, the type
C<Empty>, C<Universal>, or C<Empty>.  Iff C<tdm> is
C<Cat.E_TDM.difference>, then the data type is defined as the difference of
2 other types, and C<types> has one element that is the name of the minuend
type.  Iff C<tdm> is C<Cat.E_TDM.negation>, then the data type is defined
as the negation of some other type, and C<types> has one element that is
the name of that type.

=item C<subtr_type> - C<Cat.NameChain>

Iff C<tdm> is C<Cat.E_TDM.difference>, then the data type is defined as the
difference of 2 other types, and C<subtr_type> is the name of the
subtrahend type.

=item C<attrs> - C<Cat.NameTypeMap>

Iff C<tdm> is C<Cat.E_TDM:root>, then the data type is defined
fundamentally in terms of an explicit attribute collection, and C<attrs>
defines the names and declared types of those attributes.  Iff additionally
C<tk> is C<Cat.E_TK:scalar>, then C<attrs> specifically defines the
attributes of just the core/initial/only possrep; otherwise, C<attrs>
defines the heading of the tuple or relation etc type.  It is valid to have
zero attributes; in this case, the type consists of exactly one value.

=item C<keys> - C<Cat.SetOfSetOfName>

Iff C<tk> is C<Cat.E_TK:(relation|quasi_relation)> and C<tdm> is not
C<Cat.E_TDM:special>, then the data type is or resembles a relation type
and can have explicit keys (duality of unique key constraints and terser
unique identifiers for the q/relation's member q/tuples) defined over its
attributes, and C<keys> defines those keys in the canonical simplest form
(in contrast with using C<constraint> instead).  Each element of C<keys>
defines one key of the q/relation, and that element is a set of the
attribute names comprising that key.  For q/relation types, if no keys are
explicitly defined, then it implicitly has a single key comprising all of
its attributes.  If any explicit keys are defined, then every one must be
over a distinct proper subset of the type's attributes, and moreover no
key's attributes may be a proper subset of any other key's attributes; if 2
such candidates appear, just use the one that has the subset.  It is valid
for a key to consist of zero attributes; in this case, that key is the only
key of the q/relation type, and values of the type may each consist of no
more than one tuple.

=item C<constraint> - C<Cat.TypeConstraint> ... default one always res True

Iff C<tdm> is C<Cat.E_TDM:root>, then the data type is defined
fundamentally in terms of an explicit attribute collection, and
C<constraint> defines/names a generalized type constraint that validates
the collection as a whole.  Iff C<tdm> is C<Cat.E_TDM:restriction>, then
the data type is defined as an explicit subtype of another type by way of
an explicit further type constraint applied to it, and C<constraint>
defines/names that further constraint.

=back

The default value of C<Cat.Type> is an alias of C<Empty>.

=head2 sys.Core.Cat.ExprNode

A C<Cat.ExprNode> is a C<Tuple>.  It specifies a named expression node,
which is the majority component of functional Muldis D code.  All
arbitrarily complex Muldis D expression trees, including relational
queries, are composed of just C<Cat.ExprNode>, either directly, or
indirectly by way of function invocations, as each function body is itself
composed entirely of a single expression tree (of at least 1 node).  Only
functions and update operators may contain C<Cat.ExprNode>, so for any
procedures that would conceptually include them, those portions of the
procedures need to be separated out and encapsulated by named functions or
inner-functions or update operators or inner-update-operators.  Note that,
while the general case has expression trees simply denoting a value, in
some cases they may instead define a pseudo-variable / virtual variable;
that only happens in update operators where the expression is used as an
argument for a subject-to-update parameter of an update operator call; in
that case the leaf nodes / only node of the expression must map to a
subject-to-update parameter of the containing update operator.

A C<Cat.ExprNode> has these 8 attributes:

=over

=item C<name> - C<Cat.Name>

This is the declared name of the expression node; other Muldis D code that
is composing this expression node into their own definitions would
reference it with this name.

=item C<type> - C<Cat.NameChain>

This is the declared result data type of the expression node.  If the
expression node represents a literal value, this is often necessary for
properly interpreting the details of that literal, particularly for
literals that are not scalar.  Otherwise, although the result type of an
expression can sometimes be inferred from context, such as from the result
type of a function it is an invocation of, this redundancy helps make
static analysis of Muldis D code easier, so it is easier to validate and
optimize in isolation from the other routines it interacts with.  Moreover,
this type declaration provides a terse way to use the C<treat> function
frequently in code, so that the programmer and compiler knows that some
generic routines are actually supposed to be resulting in a subtype of
their normal result types.

=item C<kind> - C<Cat.E_ENK>

This is the declared kind of expression that this node is; it says how to
interpret the rest of the attributes and/or which of them have significant
values.

=item C<scal_lit> - C<Cat.ScalarLiteral>

Iff C<kind> is C<Cat.E_ENK:scalar>, then the expression represents a
hard-coded scalar literal of one of a certain collection of system-defined
core scalar types (or subtype thereof), and this is that literal value.

=item C<coll_lit> - C<Cat.SetOfNameExprMap>

Iff C<kind> is C<Cat.E_ENK:(|quasi_)(tuple|relation)>, then the expression
represents a collection literal, and these are the values of its
components.  Each element defines one tuple, and each sub-element of that
element defines one attribute value for one tuple, with the sub-element
C<name> matching the attribute name, and the sub-element C<expr> naming
another local C<Cat.ExprNode> which defines the value.  The value of
C<coll_lit> defines exactly one tuple when C<kind> specifies a tuple or
quasi-tuple, and it defines 0..N tuples when C<kind> specifies a relation
or quasi-relation.

=item C<param> - C<Cat.Name>

Iff C<kind> is C<Cat.E_ENK:param>, then the expression represents the value
of the containing function's parameter which this names.  Or, if C<kind> is
C<Cat.E_ENK:upd_param> or C<Cat.E_ENK:ro_param>, then the expression
represents the on-entry value or value of the containing update operator's
subject-to-update or read-only parameter, respectively.

=item C<func> - C<Cat.NameChain>

Iff C<kind> is C<Cat.E_ENK:func>, then the expression represents the result
of invoking a named function with specific arguments, and this the name of
that function.

=item C<func_args> - C<Cat.NameExprMap>

Iff C<func> is used, then these are the arguments for the function
invocation.  Each element defines one argument value, with the element
C<name> matching the parameter name, and the element C<expr> naming another
local C<ExprNode> which defines the value.

=back

The default value of C<Cat.ExprNode> represents the literal scalar value
C<Bool:false>.

=head2 sys.Core.Cat.InnerFunc

A C<Cat.InnerFunc> is a C<Tuple>.  It specifies a named C<inner_function>
routine, which is the main component type of a complete routine; a complete
function consists of at least one inner function, which is its main body,
plus more when it would conceptually be using anonymous inline function
definitions (to pass to function-valued function arguments), or when it
would conceptually have self-referencing/cyclic expressions.

A C<Cat.InnerFunc> has these 6 attributes:

=over

=item C<name> - C<Cat.Name>

This is the declared name of the inner function within its parent complete
function; other Muldis D code within said complete function would reference
it with this name.

=item C<result_type> - C<Cat.NameChain>

This is the declared result data type of the inner function as a whole.

=item C<is_recursive> - C<Bool>

This is C<Bool:true> if the inner function might possibly invoke itself,
either directly or indirectly; it is C<Bool:false> if it promises to never
be recursive.  Note that the C<is_recursive> attribute does not make any
claims regarding the actions of any anonymous functions that it is passed
as function-valued arguments, which may cause this inner function to be
involved in a recursion even if C<is_recursive> is C<Bool:false>.  I<Note
that this may be changed later, or the attribute simply be eliminated.>

=item C<params> - C<Cat.NameTypeMap>

This is the declared parameter list of the inner function, which has 0..N
named and typed parameters.

=item C<root_expr> - C<Cat.Name>

This indicates which of the expression nodes comprising this inner function
is its root node, the result of which is the result of the inner function.

=item C<expr> - C<Cat.ExprTree>

This defines the entire body of the inner function, which is composed of
a single expression tree.  This expression tree must reference all of the
parameters that the inner function has.

=back

The default value of C<Cat.InnerFunc> unconditionally results in the
literal scalar value C<Bool:false>.

=head2 sys.Core.Cat.Func

A C<Cat.Func> is a C<Tuple>.  It specifies a named C<function> routine,
which is conceptually a non-anonymous function that is generally invokable
by the public (unless its parent package says otherwise).

A C<Cat.Func> has these 3 attributes:

=over

=item C<name> - C<Cat.Name>

This is the declared name of the function; other Muldis D code would
reference it with this name.

=item C<root_inner_func> - C<Cat.Name>

This indicates which of the inner functions comprising this function
defines its public interface / parameter list and main body.

=item C<inner_funcs> - C<Cat.InnerFuncTree>

This defines the entire body of the function (both its main body plus any
conceptually expression-inlined anonymous functions), which is composed of
one or more inner functions, plus its public interface / parameter list,
which is defined by one of those.

=back

The default value of C<Cat.Func> unconditionally results in the literal
scalar value C<Bool:false> as per the default of C<Cat.InnerFunc>.

=head2 sys.Core.Cat.UpdStmt

A C<Cat.UpdStmt> is a C<Tuple>.  It specifies a single update statement (of
1..N variables), which is the most fundamental component of procedural
Muldis D code, and is what the body of an update operator routine is
composed of.  The variables being updated are accessed via the host
routine's subject-to-update parameters.  All arbitrarily complex Muldis D
value assignments, including relational assignments, are composed of just
C<Cat.UpdStmt>, either directly, or indirectly by way of update operator
invocations, as each update operator body is itself composed entirely of 1
or more update statements (grouped as 1 multi-update).  Only update
operators may contain C<Cat.UpdStmt>, so for any procedures that would
conceptually include them, those portions of the procedures need to be
separated out and encapsulated by named update operators or
inner-update-operators.

A C<Cat.UpdStmt> has these 3 attributes:

=over

=item C<updater> - C<Cat.NameChain>

Every update statement is an invocation of some other update operator (or
inner-update-operator), either a user-defined or system-defined one (the
latter generally being the end of the call chain); this is the name of that
update operator.

=item C<upd_args> - C<Cat.NameExprMap>

These are the 1..N subject-to-update arguments to the update operator
invocation, as-per C<ro_args>.  But since each expression tree in
C<upd_args> is binding to a subject-to-update parameter, the expression
tree actually is defining a pseudo-variable / virtual-variable over 1..N
containing routine subject-to-update parameters; in the most trivial (and
common) case, such an expression tree is a single node that represents said
parameter without any indirection at all.

=item C<ro_args> - C<Cat.NameExprMap>

These are the 0..N read-only arguments to the update operator invocation.
Each element defines one argument value, with the element C<name> matching
the parameter name, and the element C<expr> naming a local C<ExprNode>
which defines the value.

=back

The default value of C<Cat.UpdStmt> will unconditionally update 1
subject-to-update parameter of name C<topic> with the value C<Bool:false>.

=head2 sys.Core.Cat.InnerUpdater

A C<Cat.InnerUpdater> is a C<Tuple>.  It specifies a named C<updater>
routine, which is the main component type of a complete implicitly atomic
procedural routine; a complete update operator consists of at least one
inner update operator, which is its main body, likely plus more when it
would conceptually be code refactored.

A C<Cat.InnerUpdater> has these 6 attributes:

=over

=item C<name> - C<Cat.Name>

This is the declared name of the inner update operator within its parent
complete update operator; other Muldis D code within said complete update
operator would reference it with this name.

=item C<is_recursive> - C<Bool>

This is C<Bool:true> if the inner update operator might possibly invoke
itself, either directly or indirectly; it is C<Bool:false> if it promises
to never be recursive.  I<Note that this attribute may be eliminated.>

=item C<upd_params> - C<Cat.NameTypeMap>

This is the declared subject-to-update parameter list of the inner update
operator, which has 1..N named and typed such parameters.  It must have at
least 1 element.

=item C<ro_params> - C<Cat.NameTypeMap>

This is the declared read-only parameter list of the inner update operator,
which has 0..N named and typed such parameters.  There is a distributed
(unique) key over the C<name> attributes of C<upd_params> and C<ro_params>.

=item C<exprs> - C<Cat.ExprSet>

This defines the expression trees that are arguments to the update
operators that C<stmt> invokes.  These expression trees must reference all
of the parameters that the inner update operator has.

=item C<stmt> - C<Cat.MultiUpdStmt>

This defines the entire body of the inner update operator, which is
composed of a single multi-update statement.  This multi-update statement
must reference all of the parameters that the inner update operator has.

=back

The default value of C<Cat.InnerUpdater> has 1 subject-to-update parameter
named C<topic> and declared type C<Bool> and will unconditionally update
it to the value C<Bool:false>; it has zero read-only parameters.

=head2 sys.Core.Cat.Updater

A C<Cat.Updater> is a C<Tuple>.  It specifies a named C<update operator>
routine, which is conceptually a non-anonymous update operator that is
generally invokable by the public (unless its parent package says
otherwise).

A C<Cat.Updater> has these 4 attributes:

=over

=item C<name> - C<Cat.Name>

This is the declared name of the update operator; other Muldis D code would
reference it with this name.

=item C<root_inner_updater> - C<Cat.Name>

This indicates which of the inner update operators comprising this update
operator defines its public interface / parameter list and main body.

=item C<inner_updaters> - C<Cat.InnerUpdaterTree>

This (save for C<inner_funcs>) defines the entire body of the update
operator, which is composed of one or more inner update operators, plus its
public interface / parameter list, which is defined by one of those.

=item C<inner_funcs> - C<Cat.InnerFuncSet>

This also contributes to the body of the update operator.

=back

The default value of C<Cat.Updater> is as per the default of
C<Cat.InnerUpdater>.

=head2 sys.Core.Cat.ProcStmtArg

A C<Cat.ProcStmtArg> is a C<Tuple>.  It specifies a named argument for a
procedural routine invocation done as a procedure statement, and is
composed into the C<Cat.ProcStmt> definition of said statement.

A C<Cat.ProcStmtArg> has these 6 attributes:

=over

=item C<name> - C<Cat.Name>

This is the declared name of the invoked procedural routine's parameter
(either subject-to-update or read-only) that this argument is binding to.

=item C<type> - C<Cat.NameChain>

This is as per the C<type> attribute of a C<Cat.ExprNode>, but applying to
the declared data type of the argument.

=item C<kind> - C<Cat.E_PSAK>

This is the declared kind of value that this argument is; it says how to
interpret the rest of the attributes and/or which of them have significant
values.

=item C<param> - C<Cat.Name>

Iff C<kind> is C<Cat.E_PSAK:upd_param> or C<Cat.E_PSAK:ro_param>, then the
argument is the current value or value of the containing procedure's
subject-to-update or read-only parameter, respectively.

=item C<inner_var> - C<Cat.Name>

Iff C<kind> is C<Cat.E_PSAK:inner_var>, then the argument is the current
value of a lexical variable that isn't a parameter.

=item C<outer_var> - C<Cat.NameChain>

Iff C<kind> is C<Cat.E_PSAK:outer_var>, then the argument is the current
value of a non-lexical variable.

=back

The default value of C<Cat.ProcStmtArg> will bind to a read-only parameter
of name C<topic> with a value of the containing procedure's read-only
parameter named C<topic>.

=head2 sys.Core.Cat.ProcStmt

A C<Cat.ProcStmt> is a C<Tuple>.  It specifies a generic statement from
which non-implicitly-atomic procedural Muldis D code is composed.  Only
procedures (or inner procedures) may contain C<Cat.ProcStmt>.

A C<Cat.ProcStmt> has these 3 attributes:

=over

=item C<proc> - C<Cat.NameChain>

Every procedure statement is an invocation of some other procedural routine
(eg, procedure, update operator, system service), either user-defined or
system-defined; this is the name of that routine.

=item C<upd_args> - C<Cat.ProcStmtArgSet>

These are the 0..N subject-to-update arguments to the routine invocation,
as-per C<ro_args>.

=item C<ro_args> - C<Cat.ProcStmtArgSet>

These are the 0..N read-only arguments to the routine invocation.  There is
a distributed (unique) key over the C<name> attributes of C<upd_params> and
C<ro_params>.

=back

The default value of C<Cat.ProcStmt> will invoke
C<sys.Core.Universal.assign>, giving it arguments from same-named and typed
parameters.

=head2 sys.Core.Cat.InnerProc

A C<Cat.InnerProc> is a C<Tuple>.  It specifies a named C<procedure>
routine, which is the main component type of a complete procedure; a
complete procedure consists of at least one inner procedure, which is its
main body, likely plus more when it would conceptually be code refactored.

A C<Cat.InnerProc> has these 6 attributes:

=over

=item C<name> - C<Cat.Name>

This is the declared name of the inner procedure within its parent complete
procedure; other Muldis D code within said complete procedure would
reference it with this name.

=item C<is_recursive> - C<Bool>

This is C<Bool:true> if the inner procedure might possibly invoke
itself, either directly or indirectly; it is C<Bool:false> if it promises
to never be recursive.  I<Note that this attribute may be eliminated.>

=item C<upd_params> - C<Cat.NameTypeMap>

This is the declared subject-to-update parameter list of the inner
procedure, which has 0..N named and typed such parameters.

=item C<ro_params> - C<Cat.NameTypeMap>

This is the declared read-only parameter list of the inner procedure,
which has 0..N named and typed such parameters.  There is a distributed
(unique) key over the C<name> attributes of C<upd_params> and C<ro_params>.

=item C<vars> - C<Cat.NameTypeMap>

This defines the 0..N (non-parameter) lexical variables of the inner
procedure; they initialize to the default values of their declared types.

=item C<stmts> - C<Cat.SeqOfProcStmt>

This defines the entire main body of the inner procedure, which is composed
of 0..N procedure statements.  These statements must reference all of the
parameters and lexical variables that the inner procedure has.

=back

The default value of C<Cat.InnerProc> is a no-op; its C<name> has the
default value of C<Cat.Name>, it has zero parameters, zero variables, and
zero statements.

=head2 sys.Core.Cat.Proc

A C<Cat.Proc> is a C<Tuple>.  It specifies a named C<procedure> routine,
which is conceptually a non-anonymous procedure that is generally invokable
by the public (unless its parent package says otherwise).

A C<Cat.Proc> has these 5 attributes:

=over

=item C<name> - C<Cat.Name>

This is the declared name of the procedure; other Muldis D code would
reference it with this name.

=item C<root_inner_proc> - C<Cat.Name>

This indicates which of the inner procedures comprising this update
operator defines its public interface / parameter list and main body.

=item C<inner_procs> - C<Cat.InnerProcTree>

This (save for C<inner_updaters> and C<inner_funcs>) defines the entire
body of the procedure, which is composed of one or more inner procedures,
plus its public interface / parameter list, which is defined by one of
those.

=item C<inner_updaters> - C<Cat.InnerUpdaterTree>

This also contributes to the body of the update operator.

=item C<inner_funcs> - C<Cat.InnerFuncSet>

This also contributes to the body of the update operator.

=back

The default value of C<Cat.Proc> is as per the default of C<Cat.InnerProc>.

=head2 sys.Core.Cat.Exception

I<TODO.>

=head1 SYSTEM-DEFINED CORE CATALOG RELATION DATA TYPES

These relation data types, essentially all of the system-defined relation
types are special-purpose in nature and are intended for use in defining or
working with the system catalog.  They are all completely defined types.

I<To keep things simpler for now, most constraint definitions for these
types are missing, or just defined informally.>

=head2 sys.Core.Cat.NameTypeMap

A C<Cat.NameTypeMap> is a C<Relation>.  It defines a basic component list,
meaning a set of names, with a declared data type name for each.  It forms
the foundation for most componentized type definitions, including all tuple
and relation types (for which it is named I<heading>), and it is used also
for the components list of a scalar possrep.  It is also used to define
parameter lists for routines.  A C<Cat.NameTypeMap> has 2 attributes,
C<name> (a C<Cat.Name>) and C<type> (a C<Cat.NameChain>); the C<name> is
the declared name of the attribute or parameter, and comprises a unary key;
the C<type> is the declared data type of the attribute or parameter.  Its
default value has zero tuples.

=head2 sys.Core.Cat.NameExprMap

A C<Cat.NameExprMap> is a C<Relation>.  It defines a basic component-values
list, meaning a set of names, with a declared local expression node name
for each.  It is used to define collection literals; one C<Cat.NameExprMap>
defines a whole C<Tuple> value.  It is also used to define argument lists
for routine invocations.  A C<Cat.NameExprMap> has 2 attributes, C<name>
and C<expr>, each of those being a C<Cat.Name>; the C<name> is the name of
the tuple/etc attribute or routine argument, and comprises a unary key; the
C<expr> is the declared local name of the expression node which defines the
value for the attribute or argument.  Its default value has zero tuples.

=head2 sys.Core.Cat.AttrRenameMap

A C<Cat.AttrRenameMap> is a C<Relation>.  It is used as a specification for
how to rename attributes of some collection.  A C<Cat.AttrRenameMap> has 2
attributes, C<before> and C<after>, each of those being a C<Cat.Name>, and
each of those being a unary key.  Its default value has zero tuples.

=head2 sys.Core.Cat.ExprSet

A C<Cat.ExprSet> is the same as a C<Cat.ExprTree> except that it can
represent multiple trees rather than one; this is realized in that more
than one (rather than exactly one) member may have none of its peers as a
parent node.  It so happens then that C<Cat.ExprTree> is a proper subtype
of C<Cat.ExprSet>.

=head2 sys.Core.Cat.ExprTree

A C<Cat.ExprTree> is a C<Relation> with the same heading as
C<Cat.ExprNode>; it specifies a simple tree of named expression nodes,
which are its tuples.  It has a unary (unique) key on the C<name>
attribute, and it must have at least 1 member tuple.  All member tuples
must define a simple expression node tree, such that every member except
one has one of its peers as a parent node, and no direct cycles between
members are permitted (only indirect cycles based on function /
inner-function invocations are allowed).  The default value of
C<Cat.ExprTree> has one tuple that is the default value of C<Cat.ExprNode>;
the tree represents the literal scalar value C<Bool:false>.

=head2 sys.Core.Cat.InnerFuncSet

A C<Cat.InnerFuncSet> is a C<Relation> with the same heading as
C<Cat.InnerFunc>; it specifies a set of inner functions (that comprise
parts of the same complete routine), which are its tuples.  It has a unary
(unique) key on the C<name> attribute.  Its default value is empty, which
may be applicable if the complete routine is not a function.

=head2 sys.Core.Cat.InnerFuncTree

A C<Cat.InnerFuncTree> is a proper subtype of C<Cat.InnerFuncSet> which is
likely to only be applicable if the complete routine is a function.  It
must have at least 1 member tuple.  All member tuples must define a single
invocation tree but that cycles are allowed, including that invoke what is
conceptually the tree root (main function if applicable).  The default
value of C<Cat.InnerFuncTree> has one tuple that is the default value of
C<Cat.InnerFunc>.

=head2 sys.Core.Cat.MultiUpdStmt

A C<Cat.MultiUpdStmt> is a C<Relation> with the same heading as
C<Cat.UpdStmt>; it is a multi-update statement, which is the narrowest
scope implicitly atomic component of procedural Muldis D code.  One value
of this type comprises the entire body of an update operator (or
inner-update-operator).  It must have at least 1 member tuple.  The default
value of C<Cat.MultiUpdStmt> has one tuple that is the default value of
C<Cat.UpdStmt>.

=head2 sys.Core.Cat.InnerUpdaterSet

A C<Cat.InnerUpdaterSet> is a C<Relation> with the same heading as
C<Cat.InnerUpdater>; it specifies a set of inner update operators (that
comprise parts of the same complete routine), which are its tuples.  It has
a unary (unique) key on the C<name> attribute.  Its default value is empty,
which may be applicable if the complete routine is not an update operator.

=head2 sys.Core.Cat.InnerUpdaterTree

A C<Cat.InnerUpdaterTree> is a proper subtype of C<Cat.InnerUpdaterSet>
which is likely to only be applicable if the complete routine is a update
operator.  It must have at least 1 member tuple.  All member tuples must
define a single invocation tree but that cycles are allowed, including that
invoke what is conceptually the tree root (main update operator if
applicable).  The default value of C<Cat.InnerUpdaterTree> has one tuple
that is the default value of C<Cat.InnerUpdater>.

=head2 sys.Core.Cat.ProcStmtArgSet

A C<Cat.ProcStmtArgSet> is a C<Relation> with the same heading as
C<Cat.ProcStmtArg>; it specifies a set of arguments to an invocation of a
procedural routine.  It has a unary (unique) key on the C<name> attribute.
Its default value is empty.

=head2 sys.Core.Cat.InnerProcTree

A C<Cat.InnerProcTree> is to C<Cat.InnerProc> what C<Cat.InnerUpdaterTree>
is to C<Cat.InnerUpdater>.

=head2 sys.Core.Cat.SetOfName

A C<Cat.SetOfName> is a C<Set> whose C<value> attribute has a declared type
of C<Cat.Name>.

=head2 sys.Core.Cat.SetOfSetOfName

A C<Cat.SetOfSetOfName> is a C<Set> whose C<value> attribute has a declared
type of C<Cat.SetOfName>.

=head2 sys.Core.Cat.SetOfNameExprMap

A C<Cat.SetOfNameExprMap> is a C<Set> whose C<value> attribute has a
declared type of C<Cat.NameExprMap>.

=head2 sys.Core.Cat.SetOfNameChain

A C<Cat.SetOfNameChain> is a C<Set> whose C<value> attribute has a declared
type of C<Cat.NameChain>.

=head2 sys.Core.Cat.NESeqOfName

A C<Cat.NESeqOfName> is a C<Seq> whose C<value> attribute has a declared
type of C<Cat.Name> and that must have at least 1 element; this type is
used as the definition of the sequence possrep of a C<Cat.NameChain> (see
that type for details).

=head2 sys.Core.Cat.SeqOfProcStmt

A C<Cat.SeqOfProcStmt> is a C<Seq> whose C<value> attribute has a declared
type of C<Cat.ProcStmt>.

=head1 SYSTEM-DEFINED CORE QUASI-CATALOG PARAMETERIZED TYPES

These types are incomplete proper subtypes of other core incomplete types,
and generally speaking their sole purpose is to be the declared data types
of several system-defined N-ary tuple|relation operator parameters which
are collections of generic nonscalar values.  They are called quasi-catalog
because they are not generally expected to be used for user data, but they
also are not used to compose the system catalog either.

=over

=item C<sys.Core.QuasiCat.(Set|Bag)Of(Tuple|Relation)>

A C<(Set|Bag)OfRelation> is an incompletely defined proper subtype of
C<Set|Bag> whose C<value> attribute has a declared type of a
C<Tuple|Relation> subtype; this is the parameter type of several N-ary
relational operators.

=item C<sys.Core.QuasiCat.SetOfBag>

A C<SetOfBag> is an incompletely defined proper subtype of C<Set> whose
C<value> attribute has a declared type of a C<Bag> subtype; this is the
parameter type of several N-ary relational operators that work with C<Bag>
values.

=item C<sys.Core.QuasiCat.MaybeOfTuple>

A C<MaybeOfTuple> is an incompletely defined proper subtype of C<Maybe>
whose C<value> attribute has a declared type of a C<Tuple> subtype; this is
the parameter type of the C<sys.Core.Relation.maybe_reduction> operator.

=item C<sys.Core.QuasiCat.SeqOfSeq>

A C<SeqOfSeq> is an incompletely defined proper subtype of C<Seq> whose
C<value> attribute has a declared type of a C<Seq> subtype; this is the
parameter type of the N-ary C<sys.Core.Seq.catenation> operator.

=item C<sys.Core.QuasiCat.QuasiSetOf(Tuple|Relation)>

A C<QuasiSetOfRelation> is an incompletely defined proper subtype of
C<QuasiSet> whose C<value> attribute has a declared type of
C<Tuple|Relation>; these are the parameter types of the N-ary
C<sys.Core.Tuple.product> and C<sys.Core.Relation.(join|product)>
operators.

=back

=head1 SYSTEM-DEFINED CORE SPECIALIZED SUBTYPES

These types are proper subtypes of other core types, and they are
system-defined for convenience, as they are anticipated to be frequently
used; in fact, most of them are used as the declared parameter types of
various core operators.

=over

=item C<sys.Core.Spec.(Set|Maybe|Seq|Bag)Of(Scalar|Ordered)>

A C<(Set|Maybe|Seq|Bag)Of(Scalar|Ordered)> is a completely defined proper
subtype of C<(Set|Maybe|Seq|Bag)> whose C<value> attribute has a declared
type of a C<(Scalar|Ordered)> subtype.

=item C<sys.Core.Spec.(Set|Maybe|Seq|Bag)Of(Bool|Int|UInt|Rat|Blob|Text)>

A C<(Set|Maybe|Seq|Bag)Of(Bool|Int|UInt|Rat|Blob|Text)> is a completely
defined proper subtype of C<(Set|Maybe|Seq|Bag)> whose C<value> attribute
has a declared type of a C<(Bool|Int|UInt|Rat|Blob|Text)> subtype.

=back

=head1 SYSTEM-DEFINED GENERIC UNIVERSAL FUNCTIONS

These functions are applicable to values of any data type at all.

=over

=item C<function sys.Core.Universal.is_equal result Bool params {
v1(Universal), v2(Universal) }>

This function results in C<Bool:true> iff its 2 arguments are exactly the
same value, and C<Bool:false> otherwise.  This function's arguments must be
of compatible declared types; in this case, 2 declared types are compatible
iff at least one of the following is true: 1. they are both subtypes of a
common scalar root type; 2. they are both subtypes of a common
non-incomplete tuple or relation type, that is they essentially have the
same headings; 3. at least one type is a generic (eg-C<Universal>) or
incomplete (eg-C<Seq>) type, and it is a supertype of the other.  This
function is commutative.

=item C<function sys.Core.Universal.is_not_equal result Bool params {
v1(Universal), v2(Universal) }>

This function is exactly the same as C<sys.Core.Universal.is_equal> except
that it results in the opposite boolean value when given the same
arguments.

=item C<function sys.Core.Universal.is_value_of_type result Bool params {
type(Cat.NameChain), v(Universal) }>

This function results in C<Bool:true> iff the value of its C<v> argument is
a member of the data type whose name is given in the C<type> argument, and
C<Bool:false> otherwise.  As trivial cases, this function always results in
C<Bool:true> if the named type is C<Universal>, and C<Bool:false> if it is
C<Empty>.  This function will fail if the named type doesn't exist in the
virtual machine.

=item C<function sys.Core.Universal.treat result Universal params {
as(Cat.NameChain), v(Universal) }>

This function results in the value of its C<v> argument, but that the
declared type of the result is the not-C<Empty> data type whose name is
given in the C<as> argument.  This function will fail if the named type
doesn't exist in the virtual machine, or if C<v> isn't a member of the
named type.  The purpose of C<treat> is to permit taking values from a
context having a more generic declared type, and using them in a context
having a more specific declared type; such an action would otherwise be
blocked at compile time due to a type-mismatch error; C<treat> causes the
type-mismatch validation, and possible failure, to happen at runtime
instead, on the actual value rather than declared value.  For example, if
you are storing an C<Int> value in a C<Scalar>-typed variable, using
C<treat> will cause the compiler to let you use that variable as an
argument to C<Int.sum>, which it otherwise wouldn't.

=item C<function sys.Core.Universal.default result Universal params {
of(Cat.NameChain) }>

This function results in the default value of the not-C<Empty> data type
whose name is given in the C<of> argument, and the declared type of the
result is that same type.  This function will fail if the named type
doesn't exist in the virtual machine, either at compile or runtime
depending whether the type is in the system or user namespace.  This
function is conceptually implicitly used to provide default values for
variables, so they always hold valid values of their declared type.

=back

=head1 SYSTEM-DEFINED GENERIC ORDERED FUNCTIONS

These functions are applicable to values of any data type which is a
subtype of C<Ordered>.  They provide a common syntax for sort-related
functionality, though technically every type having these functions is
re-implementing its own version.  If values of an ordered data type can
conceivably be sorted using multiple criteria (such as different text
collations), then these functions just represent the default criteria; any
additional criteria are represented by additional functions declared for
just the types they apply to.

=over

=item C<function sys.Core.Ordered.comparison result Cat.Order params {
v1(Ordered), v2(Ordered) }>

This function results in C<Cat.Order:same> iff its 2 arguments are exactly
the same value, and otherwise it results in C<Cat.Order:increase> if the
value of the C<v2> argument is considered to be an increase (as defined by
the type) over the value of the C<v1> argument, and otherwise it results in
C<Cat.Order:decrease> as the reverse of the last condition would be true.
This function's arguments must be of compatible declared types; in this
case, 2 declared types are compatible iff they are both subtypes of a
common scalar type that declares itself an C<Ordered> subtype.  Note that
C<comparison> is considered the only fundamental ordered-specific operator,
and all others are defined over it.

=item C<function sys.Core.Ordered.reverse_comparison result Cat.Order
params { v1(Ordered), v2(Ordered) }>

This function is exactly the same as C<sys.Core.Ordered.comparison> except
that it results in the reverse value when given the same arguments.  It is
a short-hand for applying C<sys.Core.Cat.Order_reverse> to the result of
C<sys.Core.Ordered.comparison> with the same arguments.

=item C<function sys.Core.Ordered.is_increase result Bool params {
v1(Ordered), v2(Ordered) }>

This function results in C<Bool:true> iff C<sys.Core.Ordered.comparison>
would result in C<Cat.Order:increase> when given the same arguments, and
C<Bool:false> otherwise.

=item C<function sys.Core.Ordered.is_decrease result Bool params {
v1(Ordered), v2(Ordered) }>

This function results in C<Bool:true> iff C<sys.Core.Ordered.comparison>
would result in C<Cat.Order:decrease> when given the same arguments, and
C<Bool:false> otherwise.

=item C<function sys.Core.Ordered.is_inside_range result Bool params {
topic(Ordered), min(Ordered), max(Ordered), min_is_inside(Bool),
max_is_inside(Bool) }>

This function results in C<Bool:true> iff its C<topic> argument is within
the range whose bounds are defined by its C<min> and C<max> arguments.  If
C<min_is_inside> or C<max_is_inside> are C<Bool:true>, then C<topic> is
considered to be within the range if it is equal to C<min> or C<max>,
respectively.  This function's arguments must be of compatible declared
types as per C<sys.Core.Ordered.comparison>.  This function will fail if
C<min> is an increase over C<max>.

=item C<function sys.Core.Ordered.is_outside_range result Bool params {
topic(Ordered), min(Ordered), max(Ordered), min_is_inside(Bool),
max_is_inside(Bool) }>

This function is exactly the same as C<sys.Core.Ordered.is_inside_range>
except that it results in the opposite boolean value when given the same
arguments.

=item C<function sys.Core.Ordered.min result Ordered params {
topic(SetOfOrdered) }>

This function is a reduction operator that recursively takes each pair of
its N input element values and picks the minimum of the 2 (a process which
is both commutative and associative) until just one is left, which is the
function's result.  If C<topic> has zero values, then C<min> results in the
result type's concept of positive infinity, which is the identity value for
I<min>.  This function will fail on a C<topic> of zero values if the result
type's concept of positive infinity is impossible or impractically large to
represent, such as with the infinite C<Text> type.

=item C<function sys.Core.Ordered.max result Ordered params {
topic(SetOfOrdered) }>

This function is exactly the same as C<sys.Core.Ordered.min> except that it
results in the maximum input element value rather than the minimum one, and
its identity value is the result type's concept of negative infinity.

=item C<function sys.Core.Ordered.maybe_min result MaybeOfOrdered params {
topic(SetOfOrdered) }>

This function is exactly the same as C<sys.Core.Ordered.min> except that it
results in a C<Maybe> of what is otherwise the result type, and that result
has zero elements if the argument has zero elements.

=item C<function sys.Core.Ordered.maybe_max result MaybeOfOrdered params {
topic(SetOfOrdered) }>

This function is to C<sys.Core.Ordered.max> as
C<sys.Core.Ordered.maybe_min> is to C<sys.Core.Ordered.min>.

=back

=head1 SYSTEM-DEFINED CORE SCALAR FUNCTIONS

These functions are applicable to just one or more specific system-defined
core scalar data type.

=head2 Functions for sys.Core.Bool.Bool

These functions select values of the C<Bool> enumeration.

=over

=item C<function sys.Core.Bool.(false|true) result Bool params {}>

This selector function results in the C<Bool:(false|true)> value.

=back

These functions implement commonly used boolean operations.

=over

=item C<function sys.Core.Bool.not result Bool params { topic(Bool) }>

This function results in the logical I<not> of its argument.

=item C<function sys.Core.Bool.and result Bool params { topic(SetOfBool) }>

This function is a reduction operator that recursively takes each pair of
its N input element values and does a logical I<and> (which is both
commutative and associative) on them until just one is left, which is the
function's result.  If C<topic> has zero values, then C<and> results in
C<Bool:true>, which is the identity value for logical I<and>.

=item C<function sys.Core.Bool.or result Bool params { topic(SetOfBool) }>

This function is a reduction operator that recursively takes each pair of
its N input element values and does a logical inclusive-or (which is both
commutative and associative) on them until just one is left, which is the
function's result.  If C<topic> has zero values, then C<or> results in
C<Bool:false>, which is the identity value for logical inclusive-or.

=item C<function sys.Core.Bool.xor result Bool params { topic(BagOfBool) }>

This function is a reduction operator that recursively takes each pair of
its N input element values and does a logical exclusive-or (which is both
commutative and associative) on them until just one is left, which is the
function's result.  If C<topic> has zero values, then C<xor> results in
C<Bool:false>, which is the identity value for logical exclusive-or.

=back

=head2 Functions for sys.Core.Int.Int

These functions implement commonly used integer numeric operations.

=over

=item C<function sys.Core.Int.increase result Int params { topic(Int) }>

This function results in its argument increased by 1.

=item C<function sys.Core.Int.decrease result Int params { topic(Int) }>

This function results in its argument decreased by 1.

=item C<function sys.Core.Int.abs result UInt params { topic(Int) }>

This function results in the absolute value of its argument.

=item C<function sys.Core.Int.sum result Int params { addends(BagOfInt) }>

This function results in the sum of the N element values of its argument;
it is a reduction operator that recursively takes each pair of input values
and adds (which is both commutative and associative) them together until
just one is left, which is the result.  If C<addends> has zero values, then
C<sum> results in the integer zero, which is the identity value for
addition.

=item C<function sys.Core.Int.difference result Int params { minuend(Int),
subtrahend(Int) }>

This function results in the difference when its C<subtrahend> argument is
subtracted from its C<minuend> argument.

=item C<function sys.Core.Int.product result Int params { factors(BagOfInt)
}>

This function results in the product of the N element values of its
argument; it is a reduction operator that recursively takes each pair of
input values and multiplies (which is both commutative and associative)
them together until just one is left, which is the result.  If C<factors>
has zero values, then C<product> results in the integer 1, which is the
identity value for multiplication.

=item C<function sys.Core.Int.quotient result Int params { dividend(Int),
divisor(Int) }>

This function results in the quotient when its C<dividend> argument is
divided by its C<divisor> argument using integer division.  This function
will fail if C<divisor> is zero.

=item C<function sys.Core.Int.remainder result UInt params { dividend(Int),
divisor(Int) }>

This function results in the remainder when its C<dividend> argument is
divided by its C<divisor> argument using integer division.  This function
will fail if C<divisor> is zero.

=item C<function sys.Core.Int.maybe_quotient result MaybeOfInt params {
dividend(Int), divisor(Int) }>

This function is exactly the same as C<sys.Core.Int.quotient> except that
it results in a C<Maybe> of what is otherwise the result, and that result
has zero elements if C<divisor> is zero.

=item C<function sys.Core.Int.maybe_remainder result MaybeOfUInt params {
dividend(Int), divisor(Int) }>

This function is exactly the same as C<sys.Core.Int.remainder> except that
it results in a C<Maybe> of what is otherwise the result, and that result
has zero elements if C<divisor> is zero.

=item C<function sys.Core.Int.range result Int params { topic(SetOfInt) }>

This function results in the difference between the lowest and highest
element values of its argument.  If C<topic> has zero values, then C<range>
results in the integer zero.

=item C<function sys.Core.Int.median result SetOfInt params {
topic(BagOfInt) }>

This function results in the 1 or 2 median values of the N element values
of its argument; they are returned as a set.  It is equivalent to first
arranging the input values from least to greatest, and then taking the
single middle value, if the count of input values is odd, or taking the 2
middle values, if the count of input values is even (but if the 2 middle
values are the same value, the output has one element).  If C<topic> has
zero values, then the result set is empty.

=item C<function sys.Core.Int.mode result SetOfInt params { topic(BagOfInt)
}>

This function results in the mode of the N element values of its argument;
it is the set of values that appear the most often as input elements, and
all have the same count of occurrances.  As a trivial case, if all input
elements have the same count of occurrances, then they will all be in the
output.  If C<topic> has zero values, then the result set is empty.

=item C<function sys.Core.Int.power result Int params { radix(Int),
exponent(UInt) }>

This function results in its C<radix> argument taken to the power of its
(unsigned integer) C<exponent> argument.  This function will fail if
C<radix> and C<exponent> are both zero.

=item C<function sys.Core.Int.factorial result PInt params { topic(UInt) }>

This function results in the factorial of its argument (it is defined for
an argument of zero to result in 1, as per the identity value for
multiplication of an empty set).

=back

These functions convert between C<Int> values and canonically formatted
representations of integers as character strings.

=over

=item C<function sys.Core.Int.Int_from_NEText result Int params {
text(NEText), radix(Cat.PInt2_36) }>

This selector function results in the C<Int> value that its C<text>
argument maps to when the whole character string is evaluated as a
base-C<radix> integer.  Extending the typical formats of [base-2, base-8,
base-10, base-16], this function supports base-2 through base-36; to get
the latter, the characters 0-9 and A-Z represent values in 0-35.  This
function will fail if C<text> can't be mapped as specified.

=item C<function sys.Core.Int.NEText_from_Int result NEText params {
int(Int), radix(Cat.PInt2_36) }>

This selector function results in the C<NEText> value where its C<int>
argument is formatted as a base-C<radix> integer.

=back

These functions convert between C<Int> values and canonically formatted
representations of integers as binary strings.  I<Conjecture: These may not
actually be useful, and perhaps only operators that take an argument
specifying a fixed-length field size, with big and little endian versions,
would be appropriate instead.  Or maybe both kinds are necessary.>

=over

=item C<function sys.Core.Int.Int_from_Blob_S_VBE result Int params {
blob(NEBlob) }>

This selector function results in the C<Int> value that its C<blob>
argument maps to when the whole bit string is treated literally as a
variable-length binary (two's complement) signed integer of 1 or more bits
in length.  The first bit is taken as the sign bit, and any other bits
provide greater precision than the -1 thru 0 range.  The bit string is
assumed to be big-endian, since it may not be possible to use little-endian
in situations where the bit length isn't a multiple of 8.

=item C<function sys.Core.Int.Blob_S_VBE_from_Int result NEBlob params {
int(Int) }>

This selector function results in the C<Blob> value where its C<int>
argument is formatted as a variable-length binary (two's complement) signed
integer of 1 or more bits in length; the smallest number of bits necessary
to store C<int> is used.

=item C<function sys.Core.Int.Int_from_Blob_U_VBE result UInt params {
blob(NEBlob) }>

This function is the same as C<sys.Core.Int.Int_from_Blob_S_VBE> but that
it does unsigned integers.

=item C<function sys.Core.Int.Blob_U_VBE_from_Int result UInt params {
blob(NEBlob) }>

This function is the same as C<sys.Core.Int.Blob_S_VBE_from_Int> but that
it does unsigned integers.

=back

=head2 Functions for sys.Core.Rat.Rat

These functions are essentially selectors and attribute extractors for the
conceptual possrep of a rational in terms of an integral numerator plus
denominator.

=over

=item C<function sys.Core.Rat.Rat_from_Int_pair result Rat params {
numerator(Int), denominator(PInt) }>

This selector function results in the C<Rat> value that its C<numerator>
and C<denominator> arguments map to when collectively interpreted in the
appropriate fashion, as if there were a possrep for the C<Rat> type that
was composed of such 2 attributes, but keeping in mind that multiple
distinct argument pairs can map to each same C<Rat> value, since the
arguments don't have to be a canonical pair.

=item C<function sys.Core.Rat.numerator result Int params { topic(Rat) }>

This function results in the canonical numerator of its argument, which
assumes said rational is represented with the pair of smallest possible
integers.

=item C<function sys.Core.Rat.denominator result PInt params { topic(Rat)
}>

This function results in the canonical denominator of its argument, which
assumes said rational is represented with the pair of smallest possible
integers.

=back

These functions implement commonly used rational numeric operations.

=over

=item C<function sys.Core.Rat.abs result URat params { topic(Rat) }>

This function results in the absolute value of its argument.

=item C<function sys.Core.Rat.sum result Rat params { addends(BagOfRat) }>

This function results in the sum of the N element values of its argument;
it is a reduction operator that recursively takes each pair of input values
and adds (which is both commutative and associative) them together until
just one is left, which is the result.  If C<addends> has zero values, then
C<sum> results in the rational zero, which is the identity value for
addition.

=item C<function sys.Core.Rat.difference result Rat params { minuend(Rat),
subtrahend(Rat) }>

This function results in the difference when its C<subtrahend> argument is
subtracted from its C<minuend> argument.

=item C<function sys.Core.Rat.product result Rat params { factors(BagOfRat)
}>

This function results in the product of the N element values of its
argument; it is a reduction operator that recursively takes each pair of
input values and multiplies (which is both commutative and associative)
them together until just one is left, which is the result.  If C<factors>
has zero values, then C<product> results in the rational 1, which is the
identity value for multiplication.

=item C<function sys.Core.Rat.quotient result Rat params { dividend(Rat),
divisor(Rat) }>

This function results in the quotient when its C<dividend> argument is
divided by its C<divisor> argument using rational division.  This function
will fail if C<divisor> is zero.

=item C<function sys.Core.Rat.maybe_quotient result MaybeOfRat params {
dividend(Rat), divisor(Rat) }>

This function is exactly the same as C<sys.Core.Rat.quotient> except that
it results in a C<Maybe> of what is otherwise the result, and that result
has zero elements if C<divisor> is zero.

=item C<function sys.Core.Rat.range result Rat params { topic(SetOfRat) }>

This function results in the difference between the lowest and highest
element values of its argument.  If C<topic> has zero values, then C<range>
results in the rational zero.

=item C<function sys.Core.Rat.mean result Rat params { topic(BagOfRat) }>

This function results in the mean or arithmetic average of the N element
values of its argument.  It is equivalent to first taking the sum of the
input values, and dividing that sum by the count of the input values.  If
C<topic> has zero values, then this function will fail.

=item C<function sys.Core.Rat.maybe_mean result MaybeOfRat params {
topic(BagOfRat) }>

This function is exactly the same as C<sys.Core.Rat.mean> except that it
results in a C<Maybe> of what is otherwise the result, and that result has
zero elements if C<topic> has zero values.

=item C<function sys.Core.Rat.median result SetOfRat params {
topic(BagOfRat) }>

This function results in the 1 or 2 median values of the N element values
of its argument; they are returned as a set.  It is equivalent to first
arranging the input values from least to greatest, and then taking the
single middle value, if the count of input values is odd, or taking the 2
middle values, if the count of input values is even (but if the 2 middle
values are the same value, the output has one element).  If C<topic> has
zero values, then the result set is empty.

=item C<function sys.Core.Rat.mean_of_median result Rat params {
topic(BagOfRat) }>

This function is a wrapper over C<sys.Core.Rat.median> that will result in
the mean of its result elements; it will fail if there are zero elements.

=item C<function sys.Core.Rat.mode result SetOfRat params { topic(BagOfRat)
}>

This function results in the mode of the N element values of its argument;
it is the set of values that appear the most often as input elements, and
all have the same count of occurrances.  As a trivial case, if all input
elements have the same count of occurrances, then they will all be in the
output.  If C<topic> has zero values, then the result set is empty.

=item C<function sys.Core.Rat.round result Rat params { topic(Rat),
round_rule(Cat.RatRoundRule) }>

This function results in the rational that is equal to or otherwise nearest
to its C<topic> argument, where the nearest is determined by the rational
rounding rule specified by the C<round_rule> argument.

=item C<function sys.Core.Rat.power result PRat params { radix(PRat),
exponent(Rat) }>

This function results in its (positive rational) C<radix> argument taken to
the power of its C<exponent> argument.  Note that, while this function
might conceptually have multiple real number results for some fractional
C<exponent>, it will always only result in the one that is positive.

=item C<function sys.Core.Rat.log result Rat params { topic(PRat),
radix(PRat), round_rule(Cat.RatRoundRule) }>

This function results in the logarithm of its C<topic> argument to the base
given in its (positive rational) C<radix> argument.  Since the result would
be an irrational number in the general case, the C<round_rule> argument
specifies how to coerce the conceptual result into a rational number that
is the actual result.

=item C<function sys.Core.Rat.natural_power result PRat params {
exponent(Rat), round_rule(Cat.RatRoundRule) }>

This function results in the special mathematical constant I<e> (which is
the base of the natural logarithm) taken to the power of its C<exponent>
argument.  The C<round_rule> parameter is as per C<log>.

=item C<function sys.Core.Rat.natural_log result Rat params { topic(PRat),
round_rule(Cat.RatRoundRule) }>

This function results in the natural logarithm of its C<topic> argument.
The C<round_rule> parameter is as per C<log>.

=back

These functions convert between C<Rat> values and canonically formatted
representations of rationals as character strings.

=over

=item C<function sys.Core.Rat.Rat_from_NEText result Rat params {
text(NEText), radix(Cat.PInt2_36) }>

This selector function results in the C<Rat> value that its C<text>
argument maps to when the whole character string is evaluated as a
base-C<radix> rational.  Extending the typical formats of [base-2, base-8,
base-10, base-16], this function supports base-2 through base-36; to get
the latter, the characters 0-9 and A-Z represent values in 0-35.  This
function will fail if C<text> can't be mapped as specified.

=item C<function sys.Core.Rat.NEText_from_Rat result NEText params {
rat(Rat), radix(Cat.PInt2_36) }>

This selector function results in the C<NEText> value where its C<rat>
argument is formatted as a base-C<radix> rational.

=back

These functions convert between C<Rat> values and equal or nearly equal
C<Int> values.

=over

=item C<function sys.Core.Rat.Rat_from_Int result Rat params { int(Int) }>

This selector function results in the C<Rat> value that is conceptually
equal to its C<Int> argument.

=item C<function sys.Core.Rat.Int_from_Rat result Int params { rat(Rat),
round_meth(Cat.E_RM) }>

This selector function results in the C<Int> value that is conceptually
equal to or otherwise nearest to its C<rat> argument, where the nearest is
determined by the rounding method specified by the C<round_meth> argument.

=back

=head2 Functions for sys.Core.Blob.Blob

These functions implement commonly used binary string operations.

=over

=item C<function sys.Core.Blob.catenation result Blob params {
topic(SeqOfBlob) }>

This function results in the catenation of the N element values of its
argument; it is a reduction operator that recursively takes each
consecutive pair of input values and catenates (which is associative) them
together until just one is left, which is the result.  If C<topic> has zero
values, then C<catenate> results in the empty string value, which is the
identity value for catenate.

=item C<function sys.Core.Blob.repeat result Blob params { topic(Blob),
count(UInt) }>

This function results in the catenation of C<count> instances of C<topic>.

=item C<function sys.Core.Blob.length_in_bits result UInt params {
topic(Blob) }>

This function results in the length of its argument in bits.

=item C<function sys.Core.Blob.is_substr result Bool params {
look_in(Blob), look_for(Blob), fixed_start(Bool), fixed_end(Bool) }>

This function results in C<Bool:true> iff its C<look_for> argument is a
substring of its C<look_in> argument as per the optional C<fixed_start> and
C<fixed_end> constraints, and C<Bool:false> otherwise.  If C<fixed_start>
or C<fixed_end> are C<Bool:true>, then C<look_for> must occur right at the
start or end, respectively, of C<look_in> in order for C<contains> to
results in C<Bool:true>; if either flag is C<Bool:false>, its additional
constraint doesn't apply.

=item C<function sys.Core.Blob.is_not_substr result Bool params {
look_in(Blob), look_for(Blob), fixed_start(Bool), fixed_end(Bool) }>

This function is exactly the same as C<sys.Core.Blob.is_substr> except that
it results in the opposite boolean value when given the same arguments.

=item C<function sys.Core.Blob.not result Blob params { topic(Blob) }>

This function results in the bitwise I<not> of its argument.

=item C<function sys.Core.Blob.and result Blob params { topic(SetOfBlob) }>

This function is a reduction operator that recursively takes each pair of
its N input element values and does a bitwise I<and> (which is both
commutative and associative) on them until just one is left, which is the
function's result.  This function's argument values must all be of the same
length in bits, that length being part of the argument's declared type
(that is, C<Blob> subtype) definition, and that is also the length in bits
of the function's result.  If C<topic> has zero values, then C<and> will
result in an appropriate-length string of identity/1 valued bits.

=item C<function sys.Core.Blob.or result Blob params { topic(SetOfBlob) }>

This function is the same as C<sys.Core.Blob.and> but that it recursively
does a bitwise inclusive-or rather than a bitwise I<and>, and its identity
value is composed of zero valued bits.

=item C<function sys.Core.Blob.xor result Blob params { topic(BagOfBlob) }>

This function is the same as C<sys.Core.Blob.or> but that it recursively
does a bitwise exclusive-or rather than a bitwise inclusive-or.

=back

These functions convert between C<Blob> values and canonically formatted
representations of binary strings as character strings.

=over

=item C<function sys.Core.Blob.Blob_from_Text result Blob params {
text(Text), size(Cat.PInt1_4) }>

This selector function results in the C<Blob> value that its C<text>
argument maps to when each input character represents a sequence of 1-4
bits, the number of bits per character being determined by the C<size>
argument; for example, if C<size> is 1, then each input character is a
[0-1] and represents a bit; or, if C<size> is 4, then each input character
is a [0-9A-F] and represents 4 bits.  This function will fail if C<text>
can't be mapped as specified.

=item C<function sys.Core.Blob.Text_from_Blob result Text params {
blob(Blob), size(Cat.PInt1_4) }>

This selector function results in the C<Text> value where its argument is
encoded using a character for each sequence of 1-4 bits, the number of bits
per character being determined by the C<size> argument.  This function will
fail if C<blob> doesn't have a length in bits which is a multiple of
C<size>.

=back

=head2 Functions for sys.Core.Text.Text

These functions implement commonly used character string operations.

=over

=item C<function sys.Core.Text.catenation result Text params {
topic(SeqOfText) }>

This function results in the catenation of the N element values of its
argument; it is a reduction operator that recursively takes each
consecutive pair of input values and catenates (which is associative) them
together until just one is left, which is the result.  If C<topic> has zero
values, then C<catenate> results in the empty string value, which is the
identity value for catenate.

=item C<function sys.Core.Text.repeat result Text params { topic(Text),
count(UInt) }>

This function results in the catenation of C<count> instances of C<topic>.

=item C<function sys.Core.Text.length_in_nfd_graphs result UInt params {
topic(Text) }>

This function results in the length of its argument in Unicode
Normalization Form D graphemes.

=item C<function sys.Core.Text.length_in_nfc_graphs result UInt params {
topic(Text) }>

This function results in the length of its argument in Unicode
Normalization Form C graphemes.

=item C<function sys.Core.Text.length_in_nfd_codes result UInt params {
topic(Text) }>

This function results in the length of its argument in Unicode
Normalization Form D code points.

=item C<function sys.Core.Text.length_in_nfc_codes result UInt params {
topic(Text) }>

This function results in the length of its argument in Unicode
Normalization Form C code points.

=item C<function sys.Core.Text.is_substr result Bool params {
look_in(Text), look_for(Text), fixed_start(Bool), fixed_end(Bool) }>

This function results in C<Bool:true> iff its C<look_for> argument is a
substring of its C<look_in> argument as per the optional C<fixed_start> and
C<fixed_end> constraints, and C<Bool:false> otherwise.  If C<fixed_start>
or C<fixed_end> are C<Bool:true>, then C<look_for> must occur right at the
start or end, respectively, of C<look_in> in order for C<contains> to
result in C<Bool:true>; if either flag is C<Bool:false>, its additional
constraint doesn't apply.

=item C<function sys.Core.Text.is_not_substr result Bool params {
look_in(Text), look_for(Text), fixed_start(Bool), fixed_end(Bool) }>

This function is exactly the same as C<sys.Core.Text.is_substr> except that
it results in the opposite boolean value when given the same arguments.

=item C<function sys.Core.Text.case_folded_to_upper result Text {
topic(Text) }>

This function results in the transformation of its argument where any
letters considered to be (small) lowercase are folded to (capital)
uppercase.

=item C<function sys.Core.Text.case_folded_to_lower result Text {
topic(Text) }>

This function results in the transformation of its argument where any
letters considered to be (capital) uppercase are folded to (small)
lowercase.

=item C<function sys.Core.Text.whitespace_trimmed result Text { topic(Text)
}>

This function results in the value of its argument but that any leading or
trailing whitespace characters are trimmed.

=back

=head1 SYSTEM-DEFINED CORE GENERIC NONSCALAR FUNCTIONS

These functions are applicable to mainly nonscalar types, but are generic
in that they typically work with any nonscalar types.

=head2 Functions for sys.Core.Tuple.Tuple Having Single Input Tuples

=over

=item C<function sys.Core.Tuple.degree result UInt params { topic(Tuple) }>

This function results in the degree of its argument (that is, the count of
attributes it has).

=item C<function sys.Core.Tuple.attr_from_Tuple result ScaTupRel params {
topic(Tuple) }>

This function results in the scalar or nonscalar value of the sole
attribute of its argument.  This function will fail if its argument is not
of degree 1.

=item C<function sys.Core.Tuple.Tuple_from_attr result Tuple params {
name(Cat.Name), value(ScaTupRel) }>

This function results in the C<Tuple> value which has just one attribute
whose name is given by C<name> and whose value is given by C<value>; the
attribute's declared type is the same as that of C<value>.

=item C<function sys.Core.Tuple.attr result ScaTupRel params {
topic(Tuple), name(Cat.Name) }>

This function results in the scalar or nonscalar value of the attribute of
C<topic> whose name is given by C<name>.  This function will fail if
C<name> specifies an attribute name that C<topic> doesn't have.

=item C<function sys.Core.Tuple.update_attr result Tuple params {
topic(Tuple), name(Cat.Name), value(ScaTupRel) }>

This function results in its C<topic> argument but that its attribute whose
name is C<name> has been updated with a new scalar or nonscalar value given
by C<value>.  This function will fail if C<name> specifies an attribute
name that C<topic> doesn't have, or if the declared type of C<value> isn't
a subtype of the declared type of the attribute.

=item C<function sys.Core.Tuple.rename result Tuple params { topic(Tuple),
map(Cat.AttrRenameMap) }>

This function results in a C<Tuple> value that is the same as its C<topic>
argument but that some of its attributes have different names.  Each tuple
of the argument C<map> specifies how to rename one C<topic> attribute, with
the C<before> and C<after> attributes of a C<map> tuple representing the
old and new names of a C<topic> attribute, respectively.  As a trivial
case, this function's result is C<topic> if C<map> has no tuples.  This
function supports renaming attributes to each others' names.  This function
will fail if C<map> specifies any old names that C<topic> doesn't have, or
any new names that are the same as C<topic> attributes that aren't being
renamed.

=item C<function sys.Core.Tuple.projection result Tuple params {
topic(Tuple), attrs(Cat.SetOfName) }>

This function results in the projection of its C<topic> argument that has
just the subset of attributes of C<topic> which are named in its C<attrs>
argument.  As a trivial case, this function's result is C<topic> if
C<attrs> lists all attributes of C<topic>; or, it is the nullary tuple if
C<attrs> is empty.  This function will fail if C<attrs> specifies any
attribute names that C<topic> doesn't have.

=item C<function sys.Core.Tuple.cmpl_projection result Tuple params {
topic(Tuple), attrs(Cat.SetOfName) }>

This function is the same as C<projection> but that it results in the
complementary subset of attributes of C<topic> when given the same
arguments.

=item C<function sys.Core.Tuple.wrap result Tuple params { topic(Tuple),
inner(Cat.SetOfName), outer(Cat.Name) }>

This function results in a C<Tuple> value that is the same as its C<topic>
argument but that some of its attributes have been wrapped up into a new
C<Tuple>-typed attribute, which exists in place of the original attributes.
The C<inner> argument specifies which C<topic> attributes are to be removed
and wrapped up, and the C<outer> argument specifies the name of their
replacement attribute.  As a trivial case, if C<inner> is empty, then the
result has all the same attributes as before plus a new tuple-typed
attribute of degree zero; or, if C<inner> lists all attributes of C<topic>,
then the result has a single attribute whose value is the same as C<topic>.
 This function supports the new attribute having the same name as an old
one being wrapped into it.  This function will fail if C<inner> specifies
any attribute names that C<topic> doesn't have, or if C<outer> is the same
as C<topic> attributes that aren't being wrapped.

=item C<function sys.Core.Tuple.cmpl_wrap result Tuple params {
topic(Tuple), cmpl_inner(Cat.SetOfName), outer(Cat.Name) }>

This function is the same as C<wrap> but that it wraps the complementary
subset of attributes of C<topic> to those specified by C<cmpl_inner>.

=item C<function sys.Core.Tuple.unwrap result Tuple params { topic(Tuple),
outer(Cat.Name) }>

This function is the inverse of C<sys.Core.Tuple.wrap>, such that it will
unwrap a C<Tuple>-type attribute into its member attributes.  This function
will fail if C<outer> specifies any attribute name that C<topic> doesn't
have, or if an attribute of C<topic{outer}> is the same as another C<topic>
attribute.

=back

=head2 Functions for sys.Core.Tuple.Tuple Having Multiple Input Tuples

=over

=item C<function sys.Core.Tuple.product result Tuple params {
topic(QuasiSetOfTuple) }>

This function is similar to C<sys.Core.Relation.product> but that it works
with tuples rather than relations.  This function is mainly intended for
use in connecting tuples that have all disjoint headings, such as for
extending one tuple with additional attributes.

=back

=head2 Functions for sys.Core.Relation.Relation Having Single Input
Relations

=over

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.degree result UInt params {
topic(Relation) }>

This function results in the degree of its argument (that is, the count of
attributes it has).

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.cardinality result UInt params {
topic(Relation) }>

This function results in the cardinality of its argument (that is, the
count of tuples its body has).

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.is_empty result Bool params {
topic(Relation) }>

This function results in C<Bool:true> iff its argument has zero tuples, and
C<Bool:false> otherwise.  Note that if you are using a C<Maybe> to
represent a sparse data item, analagously to a SQL nullable context, then
testing the C<Maybe> with C<is_empty> is analagous to testing a SQL
nullable with C<is null>.

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.is_not_empty result Bool params {
topic(Relation) }>

This function is exactly the same as C<sys.Core.Relation.is_empty> except
that it results in the opposite boolean value when given the same argument.
And following the analogy with C<is_empty>, C<is_not_empty> is analagous to
SQL's C<is not null>.

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.is_member result Bool params {
r(Relation), t(Tuple) }>

This function results in C<Bool:true> iff its C<t> argument matches a tuple
of its C<r> argument (that is, iff conceptually C<t> is a member of C<r>),
and C<Bool:false> otherwise.  This function is like
C<sys.Core.Relation.is_subset> except that the tuple being looked for
doesn't have to be wrapped in a relation.  This function will fail if the 2
arguments don't have the same heading.

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.is_not_member result Bool params {
r(Relation), t(Tuple) }>

This function is exactly the same as C<sys.Core.Relation.is_member> except
that it results in the opposite boolean value when given the same
arguments.

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.Tuple_from_Relation result Tuple params
{ topic(Relation) }>

This function results in the C<Tuple> that is the sole member tuple of its
argument.  This function will fail if its argument does not have exactly
one tuple.

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.Relation_from_Tuple result Relation
params { topic(Tuple) }>

This function results in the C<Relation> value those body has just the one
C<Tuple> that is its argument.

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.insertion result Relation params {
r(Relation), t(Tuple) }>

This function results in a C<Relation> that is the relational union of C<r>
and a relation whose sole tuple is C<t>; that is, conceptually the result
is C<t> inserted into C<r>.  As a trivial case, if C<t> already exists in
C<r>, then the result is just C<r>.

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.deletion result Relation params {
r(Relation), t(Tuple) }>

This function results in a C<Relation> that is the relational difference
from C<r> of a relation whose sole tuple is C<t>; that is, conceptually the
result is C<t> deleted from C<r>.  As a trivial case, if C<t> already
doesn't exist in C<r>, then the result is just C<r>.

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.empty result Relation params {
topic(Relation) }>

This function results in the empty relation of the same heading of its
argument; it has zero tuples.

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.universal result Relation params {
topic(Relation) }>

This function results in the universal relation of the same heading of its
argument; that is, the relation having all the tuples that could ever exist
in a relation with that heading.  This function will fail if said universal
relation is impossible or impractically large to represent, such as when
any attributes are of infinite types.

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.power_set result SetOfRelation params {
topic(Relation) }>

This function results in the power set of its argument.  The result is a
C<Set> whose sole attribute is C<Relation>-typed (its type is nominally the
same as that of the argument) and which has a tuple for every distinct
subset of tuples in the argument.  The cardinality of the result is equal
to 2 raised to the power of the cardinality of the argument (which may
easily lead to a very large result, so use this function with care).  Note
that the N-ary relational union of the power set of some relation is that
relation; the N-ary intersection of any power set is the empty relation.

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.negation result Relation params {
topic(Relation) }>

This function results in the relational negation/not of its argument.  The
result relation has the same heading as its argument, and its body contains
all of the tuples that are in the universal relation of the same heading
and that are not in the argument; that is, the result is the relational
difference when the argument is subtracted from said universal relation.
This function will fail on any argument that C<sys.Core.Relation.universal>
would fail on.

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.rename result Relation params {
topic(Relation), map(Cat.AttrRenameMap) }>

This function is the same as C<sys.Core.Tuple.rename> but that it operates
on and results in a C<Relation> rather than a C<Tuple>.

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.projection result Relation params {
topic(Relation), attrs(Cat.SetOfName) }>

This function is the same as C<sys.Core.Tuple.projection> but that it
operates on and results in a C<Relation> rather than a C<Tuple>.  But note
that the result relation will have fewer tuples than C<topic> if any
C<topic> tuples were non-distinct for just the projected attributes.

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.cmpl_projection result Relation params {
topic(Relation), attrs(Cat.SetOfName) }>

This function is the same as C<sys.Core.Tuple.cmpl_projection> but that it
operates on and results in a C<Relation> rather than a C<Tuple>.

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.wrap result Relation params {
topic(Relation), inner(Cat.SetOfName), outer(Cat.Name) }>

This function is the same as C<sys.Core.Tuple.wrap> but that it operates on
and results in a C<Relation> rather than a C<Tuple>, where each of its
member tuples was transformed as per C<sys.Core.Tuple.wrap>.

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.cmpl_wrap result Relation params {
topic(Relation), cmpl_inner(Cat.SetOfName), outer(Cat.Name) }>

This function is the same as C<sys.Core.Tuple.cmpl_wrap> but that it
operates on and results in a C<Relation> rather than a C<Tuple>, where each
of its member tuples was transformed as per C<sys.Core.Tuple.cmpl_wrap>.

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.unwrap result Relation params {
topic(Relation), outer(Cat.Name) }>

This function is the inverse of C<sys.Core.Relation.wrap> as
C<sys.Core.Tuple.unwrap> is to C<sys.Core.Tuple.wrap>.

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.group result Relation params {
topic(Relation), inner(Cat.SetOfName), outer(Cat.Name) }>

This function is similar to C<sys.Core.Relation.wrap> but that the C<topic>
attribute-wrapping transformations result in new C<Relation>-typed
attributes rather than new C<Tuple>-typed attributes, and moreover multiple
C<topic> tuples may be combined into fewer tuples whose new
C<Relation>-typed attributes have multiple tuples.  This function takes a
relation of N tuples and divides the tuples into M groups where all the
tuples in a group have the same values in the attributes which aren't being
grouped (and distinct values in the attributes that are being grouped); it
then results in a new relation of M tuples where the new relation-valued
attribute of the result has the tuples of the M groups.  A grouped relation
contains all of the information in the original relation, but it has less
redundancy due to redundant non-grouped attributes now just being
represented in one tuple per the multiple tuples whose grouped attributes
had them in common.  A relation having relation-valued attributes like this
is a common way to group so-called child tuples under their parents.  As a
trivial case, if C<inner> is empty, then the result has all the same tuples
and attributes as before plus a new relation-typed attribute of degree zero
whose value per tuple is of cardinality one; or, if C<inner> lists all
attributes of C<topic>, then the result has a single tuple of a single
attribute whose value is the same as C<topic>.  This function supports the
new attribute having the same name as an old one being grouped into it.
This function will fail if C<inner> specifies any attribute names that
C<topic> doesn't have, or if C<outer> is the same as C<topic> attributes
that aren't being grouped.

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.cmpl_group result Relation params {
topic(Relation), group_per(Cat.SetOfName), outer(Cat.Name) }>

This function is the same as C<group> but that it groups the complementary
subset of attributes of C<topic> to those specified by C<group_per>.

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.ungroup result Relation params {
topic(Relation), outer(Cat.Name) }>

This function is the inverse of C<sys.Core.Relation.group> as
C<sys.Core.Relation.unwrap> is to C<sys.Core.Relation.wrap>; it will
ungroup a C<Relation>-type attribute into its member attributes and tuples.
A relation can be first grouped and then that result ungrouped to produce
the original relation, with no data loss.  However, the ungroup of a
relation on a relation-valued attribute will lose the information in any
outer relation tuples whose inner relation value has zero tuples; a group
on this result won't bring them back.  This function will fail if C<outer>
specifies any attribute name that C<topic> doesn't have, or if an attribute
of C<topic{outer}> is the same as another C<topic> attribute.

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.transitive_closure result Relation
params { topic(Relation) }>

This function results in the transitive closure of its argument.  The
argument is a binary relation whose attributes are both of the same
declared type, and the result is a relation having the same heading and a
body which is a superset of the argument's tuples.  Assuming that the
argument represents all of the node pairs in a directed graph that have an
arc between them, and so each argument tuple represents an arc,
C<transitive_closure> will determine all of the node pairs in that graph
which have a path between them (a recursive operation), so each tuple of
the result represents a path.  The result is a superset since all arcs are
also complete paths.  The C<transitive_closure> function is intended to
support recursive queries, such as in connection with the "part explosion
problem" (the problem of finding all components, at all levels, of some
specified part).

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.reduction result Tuple params {
topic(Relation), func(Cat.NameChain), assuming(Tuple), identity(Tuple) }>

This function is a generic reduction operator that recursively takes each
pair of tuples in C<topic> and applies an argument-specified tuple
value-resulting function (which is both commutative and associative) to the
pair until just one input tuple is left, which is the result.  The function
to apply is named in the C<func> argument, and that function must have 3
arguments named C<v1>, C<v2>, C<assuming>; the last parameter is curried
with the same-named argument of C<reduction>, and the first 2 parameters
are the 2 input tuples for an invocation.  If C<topic> has zero tuples,
then C<reduction> results in the tuple given in C<identity>.  I<Note that
C<identity> may be changed to take a function name rather than a value, for
consistency with C<func>.>  This function will fail if the declared
headings of C<identity> and C<topic> aren't compatible.

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.maybe_reduction result MaybeOfTuple
params { topic(Relation), func(Cat.NameChain), assuming(Tuple) }>

This function is exactly the same as C<sys.Core.Relation.reduction> except
that it does not take an C<assuming> argument, and it results in a C<Maybe>
of what is otherwise the result type, and that result has zero elements if
the argument has zero elements.

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.restriction result Relation params {
topic(Relation), func(Cat.NameChain), assuming(Tuple) }>

This function results in the relational restriction of its C<topic>
argument as determined by applying the C<Bool>-resulting function named in
its C<func> argument when the latter function is curried by its C<assuming>
argument.  The result relation has the same heading as C<topic>, and its
body contains the subset of C<topic> tuples where, for each tuple, the
function named by C<func> results in C<Bool:true> when passed the tuple as
its C<topic> argument and C<assuming> as its C<assuming> argument.  As a
trivial case, if C<func> is defined to unconditionally result in
C<Bool:true>, then this function results simply in C<topic>; or, for an
unconditional C<Bool:false>, this function results in the empty relation
with the same heading.  Note that this operation is also legitimately known
as I<where>.  Note that C<sys.Core.Relation.semijoin> is recommended for
use instead of C<sys.Core.Relation.restriction> to implement some common
kinds of relational restrictions (those composed simply of anded or ored
tests for attribute value equality), due to the former's greater
simplicity.

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.cmpl_restriction result Relation params
{ topic(Relation), func(Cat.NameChain), assuming(Tuple) }>

This function is the same as C<restriction> but that it results in the
complementary subset of tuples of C<topic> when given the same arguments.

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.extension result Relation params {
topic(Relation), func(Cat.NameChain), assuming(Tuple) }>

This function results in the relational extension of its C<topic> argument
as determined by applying the C<Tuple>-resulting function named in its
C<func> argument when the latter function is curried by its C<assuming>
argument.  The result relation has a heading that is a superset of that of
C<topic>, and its body contains the same number of tuples, with all
attribute values of C<topic> retained, and possibly extra present,
determined as follows; for each C<topic> tuple, the function named by
C<func> results in a second tuple when passed the first tuple as its
C<topic> argument and C<assuming> as its C<assuming> argument; the first
and second tuples must have no attribute names in common, and the result
tuple is derived by joining the tuples together.  As a trivial case, if
C<func> is defined to unconditionally result in the degree-zero tuple, then
this function results simply in C<topic>.

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.substitution result Relation params {
topic(Relation), func(Cat.NameChain), assuming(Tuple) }>

This function is similar to C<extension> except that it substitutes values
of existing relation attributes rather than adding new attributes.  The
result relation has the same heading as C<topic>.  The result tuple of the
function named in C<func> must have a heading that is a subset of the
heading of C<topic>; corresponding values resulting from the function named
in C<func> will replace the values of the tuples of C<topic>.  The result
relation has a cardinality that is the same as that of C<topic>, unless the
result of any substitutions was redundant tuples, in which case the result
has appropriately fewer tuples.  As a trivial case, if C<func> is defined
to unconditionally result in either the degree-zero tuple or in the same
tuple as its own C<topic> argument, then this function results simply in
C<topic>; or, if C<func> is defined to have a static result and it replaces
all attributes, then this function's result will have just 0..1 tuples.

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.substitution_in_restriction result
Relation params { topic(Relation), restr_func(Cat.NameChain),
restr_assuming(Tuple), subst_func(Cat.NameChain), subst_assuming(Tuple) }>

This function is like C<substitution> except that it only transforms a
subset of the tuples of C<topic> rather than all of them.  It is a
short-hand for first separating the tuples of C<topic> into 2 groups where
those passed by a relational restriction (defined by C<restr_func> and
C<restr_assuming>) are then transformed (defined by C<subst_func> and
C<subst_assuming>), then the result of the substitution is unioned with the
un-transformed group.  Note that the C<substitution_in_semijoin> function
is recommended to be used instead for many common substitutions.

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.map result Relation params {
topic(Relation), func(Cat.NameChain), assuming(Tuple) }>

This function provides a convenient one-place generalization of per-tuple
transformations that otherwise might require the chaining of up to a
half-dozen other operators like restriction, extension, and rename.  This
function results in a relation each of whose tuples is the result of
applying, to each of the tuples of its C<topic> argument, the
C<Tuple>-resulting function named in its C<func> argument when the latter
function is curried by its C<assuming> argument.  There is no restriction
on what attributes the result tuple of C<func> may have (except that all
tuples from C<func> must have compatible headings); this tuple from C<func>
would completely replace the original tuple from C<topic>.  The result
relation has a cardinality that is the same as that of C<topic>, unless the
result of C<func> was redundant tuples, in which case the result has
appropriately fewer tuples.  As a trivial case, if C<func> is defined to
unconditionally result in the same tuple as its own C<topic> argument, then
this function results simply in C<topic>; or, if C<func> is defined to have
a static result, then this function's result will have just 0..1 tuples.

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.summary result Relation params {
topic(Relation), group_per(Cat.SetOfName), summ_func(Cat.NameChain),
summ_assuming(Tuple) }>

This function provides a convenient context for using aggregate functions
to derive a per-group summary relation, which is its result, from another
relation, which is its C<topic> argument.  This function first performs a
C<cmpl_group> on C<topic> using C<group_per> to specify which attributes
get grouped into a new relation-valued attribute and which don't; those
that don't instead get wrapped into a tuple-valued attribute.  Then, per
tuple in the main relation, this function applies the C<Tuple>-resulting
function named in its C<summ_func> argument when the latter function is
curried by its C<summ_assuming> argument (passed to it as just
C<assuming>); the curried function has, rather than the typical 1 C<topic>
varying parameter, 2 varying parameters named C<summarize> and C<per>,
which are valued with the relation-valued attribute and tuple-valued
attribute, respectively.  As per a function that C<map> applies, the
function named by C<summ_func> effectively takes a whole post-grouping
input tuple and results in a whole tuple; the applied function would
directly invoke any N-ary / aggregate operators, and extract their inputs
from (or calculate) C<summarize> as it sees fit.  Note that C<summary> is
not intended to be used to summarize an entire C<topic> relation at once
(except by chance of it resolving to 1 group); you should instead invoke
your summarize-all C<func> directly, or inline it, rather than by way of
C<summary>, especially if you want a single-tuple result on an empty
C<topic> (which C<summary>) won't do.

=back

=head2 Functions for sys.Core.Relation.Relation Having Multiple Input
Relations

=over

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.is_subset result Bool params {
look_in(Relation), look_for(Relation) }>

This function results in C<Bool:true> iff the set of tuples comprising
C<look_for> is a subset of the set of tuples comprising C<look_in>, and
C<Bool:false> otherwise.  This function will fail if the 2 arguments don't
have the same heading.

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.is_not_subset result Bool params {
look_in(Relation), look_for(Relation) }>

This function is exactly the same as C<sys.Core.Relation.is_subset> except
that it results in the opposite boolean value when given the same
arguments.

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.is_proper_subset result Bool params {
look_in(Relation), look_for(Relation) }>

This function is exactly the same as C<sys.Core.Relation.is_subset> except
that it results in C<Bool:false> if its 2 arguments are equal.

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.is_not_proper_subset result Bool params
{ look_in(Relation), look_for(Relation) }>

This function is exactly the same as C<sys.Core.Relation.is_proper_subset>
except that it results in the opposite boolean value when given the same
arguments.

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.union result Relation params {
topic(SetOfRelation) }>

This function results in the relational union/inclusive-or of the N element
values of its argument; it is a reduction operator that recursively takes
each pair of input values and relationally unions (which is both
commutative and associative) them together until just one is left, which is
the result.  The result relation has the same heading as all of its inputs,
and its body contains every tuple that is in any of the input relations.
If C<topic> has zero values, then C<union> results in the empty relation
with the same heading, which is the per-distinct-heading identity value for
relational union.

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.exclusion result Relation params {
topic(BagOfRelation) }>

This function results in the relational exclusion/exclusive-or of the N
element values of its argument; it is a reduction operator that recursively
takes each pair of input values and relationally excludes (which is both
commutative and associative) them together until just one is left, which is
the result.  The result relation has the same heading as all of its inputs,
and its body contains every tuple that is in just an odd number of the
input relations.  If C<topic> has zero values, then C<exclusion> results in
the empty relation with the same heading, which is the per-distinct-heading
identity value for relational exclusion.  Note that this operation is also
legitimately known as I<symmetric difference>, or I<disjoint union>.

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.intersection result Relation params {
topic(SetOfRelation) }>

This function results in the relational intersection/and of the N element
values of its argument; it is a reduction operator that recursively takes
each pair of input values and relationally intersects (which is both
commutative and associative) them together until just one is left, which is
the result.  The result relation has the same heading as all of its inputs,
and its body contains only the tuples that are in every one of the input
relations.  If C<topic> has zero values, then C<intersection> results in
the universal relation with the same heading (that is, the relation having
all the tuples that could ever exist in a relation with that heading),
which is the per-distinct-heading identity value for relational
intersection.  Note that this I<intersection> operator is conceptually a
special case of C<join>, applicable when the headings of the inputs are the
same, and the other will produce the same result as this when given the
same inputs, but with the exception that I<intersection> has a different
identity value when given zero inputs.  This function will fail on a
C<topic> of zero values if the result type's universal relation is
impossible or impractically large to represent, such as when any attributes
are of infinite types.

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.difference result Relation params {
source(Relation), filter(Relation) }>

This function results in the relational difference when its C<filter>
argument is subtracted from its C<source> argument.  The result relation
has the same heading as both of its arguments, and its body contains only
the tuples that are in C<source> and are not in C<filter>.  This function
will fail if its 2 arguments do not have the same heading.  Note that this
I<difference> operator is conceptually a special case of I<semidifference>,
applicable when the headings of the inputs are the same.

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.semidifference result Relation params {
source(Relation), filter(Relation) }>

This function is the same as C<semijoin> but that it results in the
complementary subset of tuples of C<source> when given the same arguments.
Note that this operation is also legitimately known as I<antijoin>.

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.semijoin result Relation params {
source(Relation), filter(Relation) }>

This function results in the relational semijoin of its C<source> and
C<filter> arguments.  The result relation has the same heading as
C<source>, and its body contains the subset of C<source> tuples that match
those of C<filter> as per C<join>.  Note that relational semijoin is
conceptually a short-hand for first doing an ordinary relational join
between its 2 arguments, and then performing a relational projection on all
of the attributes that just C<source> has.  This function will fail any
time that C<join> would fail on the same 2 input relations.

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.join result Relation params {
topic(QuasiSetOfRelation) }>

This function results in the relational join of the N element values of its
argument; it is a reduction operator that recursively takes each pair of
input values and relationally joins (which is both commutative and
associative) them together until just one is left, which is the result.
The result relation has a heading that is a union of all of the headings of
its inputs, and its body is the result of first pairwise-matching every
tuple of each input relation with every tuple of each other input relation,
then where each member of a tuple pair has attribute names in common,
eliminating pairs where the values of those attributes differ and unioning
the remaining said tuple pairs, then eliminating any result tuples that
duplicate others.  If C<topic> has zero values, then C<join> results in the
nullary relation with one tuple, which is the identity value for relational
join.  As a trivial case, if any input relation has zero tuples, then the
function's result will too; or, if any input is the nullary relation with
one tuple, that input can be ignored (see identity value); or, if any 2
inputs have no attribute names in common, then the join of just those 2 is
a cartesian product; or, if any 2 inputs have all attribute names in
common, then the join of just those 2 is an intersection; or, if for 2
inputs, one's set of attribute names is a proper subset of another's, then
the join of just those to is a semijoin with the former filtering the
latter.  This function will fail if any input relations have attributes
with common names but different/incompatible declared types.  Note that
this operation is also legitimately known as I<natural inner join>.

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.product result Relation params {
topic(QuasiSetOfRelation) }>

This function results in the relational cartesian/cross product of the N
element values of its argument; it is conceptually a special case of
C<join> where all input relations have mutually distinct attribute names;
unlike C<join>, C<product> will fail if any inputs have attribute names in
common.  Note that this operation is also legitimately known as
I<cartesian/cross join>.

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.composition result Relation params {
r1(Relation), r2(Relation) }>

This function results in the relational composition of its 2 arguments.  It
is conceptually a short-hand for first doing an ordinary relational join
between its 2 arguments, and then performing a relational projection on all
of the attributes that only one of the arguments has; that is, the result
has all of and just the attributes that were not involved in matching the
tuples of the 2 arguments.  This function will fail any time that C<join>
would fail on the same 2 input relations.

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.quotient result Relation params {
dividend(Relation), divisor(Relation) }>

This function results in the quotient when its C<dividend> argument is
divided by its C<divisor> argument using relational division.  Speaking
informally, say the relations C<dividend> and C<divisor> are called C<A>
and C<B>, and their attribute sets are respectively named C<{X,Y}> and
C<{Y}>, then the result relation has a heading composed of attributes
C<{X}> (so the result and C<divisor> headings are both complementary
subsets of the C<dividend> heading); the result has all tuples C<{X}> such
that a tuple C<{X,Y}> appears in C<A> for all tuples C<{Y}> appearing in
C<B>; that is, C<A / B> is shorthand for C<A{X} - ((A{X} join B) - A){X}>.

=item C<function sys.Core.Relation.substitution_in_semijoin result Relation
params { topic(Relation), restr(Relation), subst_func(Cat.NameChain),
subst_assuming(Tuple) }>

This function is like C<substitution_in_restriction> except that the subset
of the tuples of C<topic> to be transformed is determined by those matched
by a semijoin with C<restr> rather than those that pass a generic
relational restriction.

=back

=head2 Functions for sys.Core.Relation.Set

=over

=item C<function sys.Core.Set.is_member result Bool params { set(Set),
value(ScaTupRel) }>

This function results in C<Bool:true> iff its C<value> argument matches the
sole attribute of a tuple of its C<set> argument (that is, iff conceptually
C<value> is a member of C<set>), and C<Bool:false> otherwise.  This
function will fail if the declared type of C<value> isn't a subtype of the
declared type of the attribute.

=item C<function sys.Core.Set.is_not_member result Bool params { set(Set),
value(ScaTupRel) }>

This function is exactly the same as C<sys.Core.Set.is_member> except that
it results in the opposite boolean value when given the same arguments.

=item C<function sys.Core.Set.insertion result Set params { set(Set),
value(ScaTupRel) }>

This function results in a C<Set> that is the relational union of C<set>
and a Set whose sole tuple has the sole attribute value of C<value>; that
is, conceptually the result is C<value> inserted into C<set>.  As a trivial
case, if C<value> already exists in C<set>, then the result is just C<set>.

=item C<function sys.Core.Set.deletion result Set params { set(Set),
value(ScaTupRel) }>

This function results in a C<Set> that is the relational difference from
C<set> of a Set whose sole tuple has the sole attribute value of C<value>;
that is, conceptually the result is C<value> deleted from C<set>.  As a
trivial case, if C<value> already doesn't exist in C<set>, then the result
is just C<set>.

=item C<function sys.Core.Set.reduction result ScaTupRel params {
topic(Set), func(Cat.NameChain), assuming(Tuple), identity(ScaTupRel) }>

This function is a generic reduction operator that recursively takes each
pair of input values in C<topic> and applies an argument-specified scalar
or nonscalar value-resulting function (which is both commutative and
associative) to the pair until just one input value is left, which is the
result.  The function to apply is named in the C<func> argument, and that
function must have 3 arguments named C<v1>, C<v2>, C<assuming>; the last
parameter is curried with the same-named argument of C<reduction>, and the
first 2 parameters are the 2 input scalar or nonscalar values for an
invocation.  If C<topic> has zero values, then C<reduction> results in the
value given in C<identity>.  I<Note that C<identity> may be changed to take
a function name rather than a value, for consistency with C<func>.> This
function will fail if the declared type of C<identity> isn't a subtype of
the declared type of the sole attribute of C<topic>.

=item C<function sys.Core.Set.maybe_reduction result Maybe params {
topic(Set), func(Cat.NameChain), assuming(Tuple) }>

This function is exactly the same as C<sys.Core.Set.reduction> except that
it does not take an C<assuming> argument, and it results in a C<Maybe> of
what is otherwise the result type, and that result has zero elements if the
argument has zero elements.

=item C<function sys.Core.Set.Set_from_wrap result SetOfTuple params {
topic(Relation) }>

This function results in a C<Set> whose sole attribute is tuple-typed and
the attribute values are all the tuples of C<topic>; is a short-hand for a
relational wrap of all attributes of C<topic> such that the new
tuple-valued attribute is named C<value>.

=item C<function sys.Core.Set.Set_from_attr result Set params {
topic(Relation), name(Cat.Name) }>

This function results in a C<Set> consisting of all the values of the
attribute of C<topic> named by C<name>.  It is a short-hand for a unary
projection of just the named attribute plus its renaming to C<value>.

=back

=head2 Functions for sys.Core.Relation.Maybe

=over

=item C<function sys.Core.Maybe.attr_or_default result ScaTupRel params {
topic(Tuple) }>

This function results in the scalar or nonscalar value of the sole
attribute of the sole tuple of its argument, if said tuple exists;
otherwise, it results in the default value of the declared type of the said
attribute.

=item C<function sys.Core.Maybe.attr_or_value result ScaTupRel params {
topic(Tuple), value(ScaTupRel) }>

This function results in the scalar or nonscalar value of the sole
attribute of the sole tuple of C<topic>, if said tuple exists; otherwise,
it results in C<value>.  This function will fail if the declared type of
C<value> isn't a subtype of the declared type of the attribute.

=back

=head2 Functions for sys.Core.Relation.Seq

=over

=item C<function sys.Core.Seq.value result ScaTupRel params { topic(Seq),
index(UInt) }>

This function results in the scalar or nonscalar C<value> attribute of the
tuple of C<topic> whose C<index> attribute is C<index>.  This function will
fail if no tuple exists in C<topic> with the specified index.

=item C<function sys.Core.Seq.update_value result Seq params { topic(Seq),
index(UInt), value(ScaTupRel) }>

This function results in its C<topic> argument but that the C<value>
attribute of the tuple of C<topic> whose C<index> attribute is C<index> has
been updated with a new scalar or nonscalar value given by C<value>. This
function will fail if no tuple exists in C<topic> with the specified index,
or if the declared type of C<value> isn't a subtype of the declared type of
the C<value> attribute.

=item C<function sys.Core.Seq.insertion result Seq params { topic(Seq),
index(UInt), value(ScaTupRel) }>

This function results in its C<topic> argument but that a new tuple has
been inserted whose C<index> is C<index> and whose C<value> is C<value>;
any existing tuples with C<index> values greater than or equal to C<index>
had theirs increased by 1.  As a trivial case, if C<index> is equal to zero
or is equal to the cardinality of C<topic>, then C<value> has become the
new first or last (or only) element, respectively.  This function will fail
if C<index> is greater than the cardinality of C<topic>, or if the declared
type of C<value> isn't a subtype of the declared type of the C<value>
attribute.

=item C<function sys.Core.Seq.deletion result Seq params { topic(Seq),
index(UInt) }>

This function results in its C<topic> argument but that a tuple has been
deleted whose C<index> is C<index>; any existing tuples with C<index>
values greater than or equal to C<index> had theirs decreased by 1.  This
function will fail if no tuple exists in C<topic> with the specified index.

=item C<function sys.Core.Seq.is_element result Bool params { topic(Seq),
value(ScaTupRel) }>

This function results in C<Bool:true> iff its C<value> argument matches the
C<value> attribute of at least one tuple of its C<topic> argument (that is,
iff conceptually C<value> is an element of C<topic>), and C<Bool:false>
otherwise.  This function will fail if the declared type of C<value> isn't
a subtype of the declared type of that attribute.

=item C<function sys.Core.Seq.is_not_element result Bool params {
topic(Seq), value(ScaTupRel) }>

This function is exactly the same as C<sys.Core.Seq.is_element> except that
it results in the opposite boolean value when given the same arguments.

=item C<function sys.Core.Seq.reduction result ScaTupRel params {
topic(Seq), func(Cat.NameChain), assuming(Tuple), identity(ScaTupRel) }>

This function is the same as C<sys.Core.Set.reduction>, including that
input values for the reduction come from the C<value> attribute of
C<topic>, except that it works with a C<Seq> rather than a C<Set>.  Also,
the function named in C<func> is only associative, and I<not> commutative;
the arguments to C<v1> and C<v2> of C<func> are guaranteed to be
consecutive input elements, with the result returning to their place in
sequence beween the other input elements.

=item C<function sys.Core.Seq.maybe_reduction result Maybe params {
topic(Seq), func(Cat.NameChain), assuming(Tuple) }>

This function is to C<sys.Core.Set.maybe_reduction> as
C<sys.Core.Seq.reduction> is to C<sys.Core.Set.reduction>.

=item C<function sys.Core.Seq.catenation result Seq params {
topic(SeqOfSeq) }>

This function results in the catenation of the N element values of its
argument; it is a reduction operator that recursively takes each
consecutive pair of input values and catenates (which is associative) them
together until just one is left, which is the result.  To catenate 2 C<Seq>
means to union their tuples after first increasing all the C<index> values
of the second one by the cardinality of the first one.  If C<topic> has
zero values, then C<catenate> results in the empty sequence value, which is
the identity value for catenate.

=item C<function sys.Core.Seq.repeat result Seq params { topic(Seq),
count(UInt) }>

This function results in the catenation of C<count> instances of C<topic>.

=item C<function sys.Core.Seq.reverse result Seq params { topic(Seq) }>

This function results in its argument but that the order of its elements
has been reversed.  For example, the input C<< { 0=>'a', 1=>'b', 2=>'c',
3=>'d'} >> results in C<< { 0=>'d', 1=>'c', 2=>'b', 3=>'a' } >>.

=item C<function sys.Core.Seq.is_subseq result Bool params { look_in(Seq),
look_for(Seq) }>

This function results in C<Bool:true> iff the sequence of values comprising
C<look_for> is a sub-sequence of the sequence of values C<look_in>, and
C<Bool:false> otherwise.  This function will fail if the 2 arguments don't
have the same heading.

=item C<function sys.Core.Seq.is_not_subseq result Bool params {
look_in(Seq), look_for(Seq) }>

This function is exactly the same as C<sys.Core.Seq.is_subseq> except that
it results in the opposite boolean value when given the same arguments.

=back

=head2 Functions for sys.Core.Relation.Bag

=over

=item C<function sys.Core.Bag.cardinality result UInt params { topic(Bag)
}>

This function is like C<sys.Core.Relation.cardinality> but that it accounts
for the greater-than-one multiplicity of values in its argument; it results
in the sum of the C<count> attribute of its argument.

=item C<function sys.Core.Bag.is_member result Bool params { bag(Bag),
value(ScaTupRel) }>

This function is the same as C<sys.Core.Set.is_member>, including that
matching of C<value> is done against the C<value> attribute, except that it
works with a C<Bag> rather than a C<Set>.

=item C<function sys.Core.Bag.is_not_member result Bool params { bag(Bag),
value(ScaTupRel) }>

This function is exactly the same as C<sys.Core.Bag.is_member> except that
it results in the opposite boolean value when given the same arguments.

=item C<function sys.Core.Bag.count result UInt params { bag(Bag),
value(ScaTupRel) }>

This function results in the multiplicity / count of occurrances of
C<value> in C<bag>; if a tuple exists in C<bag> whose C<value> attribute is
C<value>, then the result is its C<count> attribute; otherwise the result
is zero.

=item C<function sys.Core.Bag.insertion result Bag params { bag(Bag),
value(ScaTupRel) }>

This function is the same as C<sys.Core.Set.insertion> as per C<is_member>
but that its result differs depending on whether C<value> already exists in
C<bag>; if it does, then no new tuple is added, but the C<count> attribute
for the matching tuple is increased by 1; if it does not, then a new tuple
is added where its C<value> is C<value> and its C<count> is 1.

=item C<function sys.Core.Bag.deletion result Bag params { bag(Bag),
value(ScaTupRel) }>

This function is the same as C<sys.Core.Set.deletion> as per C<is_member>
but that its result differs depending on what the C<count> for any tuple
matching C<value> that already exists in C<bag> is; if the C<count> is
greater than 1, then it is decreased by 1; if it is equal to 1, then the
tuple whose C<value> is C<value> is deleted.

=item C<function sys.Core.Bag.reduction result ScaTupRel params {
topic(Bag), func(Cat.NameChain), assuming(Tuple), identity(ScaTupRel) }>

This function is the same as C<sys.Core.Set.reduction>, including that
input values for the reduction come from the C<value> attribute of
C<topic>, except that it works with a C<Bag> rather than a C<Set>; C<func>
is invoked extra times, where both its C<v1> and C<v2> arguments might be
different instances of the same value having >= 2 multiplicity.

=item C<function sys.Core.Bag.maybe_reduction result Maybe params {
topic(Bag), func(Cat.NameChain), assuming(Tuple) }>

This function is to C<sys.Core.Set.maybe_reduction> as
C<sys.Core.Bag.reduction> is to C<sys.Core.Set.reduction>.

=item C<function sys.Core.Bag.Set_from_Bag result Set params { topic(Bag)
}>

This function results in the C<Set> that is the projection of the C<value>
attribute of its C<Bag> argument.

=item C<function sys.Core.Bag.Bag_from_Set result Bag params { topic(Set)
}>

This function results in the C<Bag> that is the extension of its C<Set>
argument with a new C<count> attribute whose value for every tuple is 1.

=item C<function sys.Core.Bag.Bag_from_wrap result BagOfTuple params {
topic(Relation) }>

This function results in a C<Bag> whose C<value> attribute is tuple-typed
and that attribute's values are all the tuples of C<topic>; is a short-hand
for a relational wrap of all attributes of C<topic> such that the new
tuple-valued attribute is named C<value>, and then that result is extended
with a C<count> attribute whose value for every tuple is 1.

=item C<function sys.Core.Bag.Bag_from_attr result Bag params {
topic(Relation), name(Cat.Name) }>

This function results in a C<Bag> consisting of all the values of the
attribute of C<topic> named by C<name>.  It is a short-hand for first doing
a relational group on all attributes of C<topic> besides C<name> to produce
a new relation-typed attribute, and then extending the result of the group
with a new positive integer attribute whose values are the cardinality of
the relation-valued attribute's values, and then doing a binary projection
of the named attribute and the new integer attribute plus their renaming to
C<value> and C<count> respectively.

=item C<function sys.Core.Bag.is_subset result Bool params { look_in(Bag),
look_for(Bag) }>

This function is like C<sys.Core.Relation.is_subset> but that it accounts
for the greater-than-one multiplicity of values in its arguments; this
function returns C<Bool:true> iff the multiplicity of each C<look_for>
value is less than or equal to the multiplicity of its counterpart
C<look_in> value.

=item C<function sys.Core.Bag.is_not_subset result Bool params {
look_in(Bag), look_for(Bag) }>

This function is like C<sys.Core.Relation.is_not_subset> as per
C<is_subset>.

=item C<function sys.Core.Bag.is_proper_subset result Bool params {
look_in(Bag), look_for(Bag) }>

This function is like C<sys.Core.Relation.is_proper_subset> as per
C<is_subset>.  I<TODO: What is its definition?>

=item C<function sys.Core.Bag.is_not_proper_subset result Bool params {
look_in(Bag), look_for(Bag) }>

This function is like C<sys.Core.Relation.is_not_proper_subset> as per
C<is_subset>.  I<TODO: What is its definition?>

=item C<function sys.Core.Bag.union result Bag params { topic(SetOfBag) }>

This function is like C<sys.Core.Relation.union> but that it just looks at
the C<value> attribute of its argument elements when determining what
element tuples correspond; then for each tuple in the result, its C<count>
attribute value is the maximum of the C<count> attribute values of its
corresponding input element tuples.

=item C<function sys.Core.Bag.intersection result Bag params {
topic(SetOfBag) }>

This function is like C<sys.Core.Relation.intersection> as C<union> is like
C<sys.Core.Relation.union>; the minimum of C<count> attribute values is
used rather than the maximum.

=item C<function sys.Core.Bag.difference result Bag params { source(Bag),
filter(Bag) }>

This function is like C<sys.Core.Relation.difference> as C<union> is like
C<sys.Core.Relation.union>; for corresponding input tuples, the result only
has a tuple with the same C<value> if the C<count> of the C<source> tuple
is greater than the C<count> of the C<filter> tuple, and the C<count> of
the result tuple is the difference of those two.

=back

=head1 SYSTEM-DEFINED CORE GENERIC QUASI-NONSCALAR FUNCTIONS

I<This documentation is pending.>

=head1 SYSTEM-DEFINED CORE CATALOG FUNCTIONS

=head2 Functions for sys.Core.Cat.Order

These functions select values of the C<Cat.Order> enumeration.

=over

=item C<function sys.Core.Cat.Order_(increase|same|decrease) result
Cat.Order params {}>

This selector function results in the C<Cat.Order:(increase|same|decrease)>
value.

=back

These functions implement commonly used order-enumeration operations.

=over

=item C<function sys.Core.Cat.Order_reverse result Cat.Order params {
topic(Cat.Order) }>

This function results in the reverse value of its argument; an
C<Cat.Order:increase> or C<Cat.Order:decrease> argument results in the
other one of the two; an C<Cat.Order:same> argument results in itself.

=back

=head1 SYSTEM-DEFINED CORE UPDATERS

=head2 Generic Universal

These update operators are applicable to values of any data type at all.

=over

=item C<updater sys.Core.Universal.assign update { target(Universal) } read
{ v(Universal) }>

This update operator will update the variable supplied as its C<target>
argument so that it holds the value supplied as its C<v> argument.  This
update operator's arguments must be of compatible declared types; in this
case, C<v> must be a subtype of C<target>.

=back

=head1 SYSTEM-DEFINED CORE SYSTEM SERVICES

These system services are applicable to just one or more specific
system-defined core scalar data type.

I<This documentation is pending.>

=head1 SYSTEM-DEFINED CORE PROCEDURES

=head2 Generic Control-Flow Procedures

These procedures are applicable to use in all kinds of procedures.

=over

=item C<procedure sys.Core.Control.fail update {} read {
topic(Cat.Exception) }>

This procedure will throw the exception given as its argument; this results
in the call stack unwinding, and transaction rollbacks, until it is caught.

=item C<procedure sys.Core.Control.try_catch update { try_updating(Tuple),
catch_updating(Tuple) } read { try(Cat.NameChain), catch(Cat.NameChain),
try_assuming(Tuple), catch_assuming(Tuple) }>

This procedure invokes the procedure named in its C<try> argument, giving
it the arguments C<try_updating> and C<try_assuming> as its C<updating> and
C<assuming> arguments, respectively.  If the C<try> procedure throws an
exception, then any state changes it made roll back (but changes made
before that don't), and the call stack unwinds to the C<try_catch> itself;
then the procedure named by C<catch> is invoked similarly to C<try> was,
with corresponding arguments, but with the extra read-only argument
C<topic> whose value is a C<Cat.Exception>; if the C<catch> procedure also
throws an exception (such as to say its not handling the thrown one), then
that one is not caught and the call stack unwinding plus applicable
transaction rollback carries on to the caller of the C<try_catch>.  If the
C<try> procedure succeeds (doesn't throw an exception), then the C<catch>
procedure is not called.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

Go to L<Language::MuldisD> for the majority of distribution-internal
references, and L<Language::MuldisD::SeeAlso> for the majority of
distribution-external references.

=head1 AUTHOR

Darren Duncan (C<perl@DarrenDuncan.net>)

=head1 LICENSE AND COPYRIGHT

This file is part of the formal specification of the Muldis D language.

Muldis D is Copyright  2002-2008, Darren Duncan.

See the LICENSE AND COPYRIGHT of L<Language::MuldisD> for details.

=head1 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS in L<Language::MuldisD> apply to this file too.

=cut
