=pod

=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

Language::MuldisD::Core::Routines -
Muldis D general purpose routines

=head1 VERSION

This document is Language::MuldisD::Core::Routines version 0.19.1.

=head1 PREFACE

This document is part of the Muldis D language specification, whose root
document is L<Language::MuldisD>; you should read that root document before
you read this one, which provides subservient details.  Moreover, you
should read the L<Language::MuldisD::Core> document before this current
document, as that forms its own tree beneath a root document branch.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document contains one or more sections that were moved here from
L<Language::MuldisD::Core> so that that other document would not be too
large.

=head1 SYSTEM-DEFINED GENERIC UNIVERSAL FUNCTIONS

These functions are applicable to values of any data type at all.

=over

=item C<function sys.Core.Universal.is_identical result Bool params {
topic(Universal), other(Universal) }>

This function results in C<Bool:true> iff its 2 arguments are exactly the
same value, and C<Bool:false> otherwise.  This function's arguments must be
of compatible declared types; in this case, 2 declared types are compatible
iff at least one of the following is true: 1. they are both subtypes of a
common scalar root type; 2. they are both subtypes of a common
non-incomplete tuple or relation type, that is they essentially have the
same headings; 3. at least one type is a generic (eg-C<Universal>) or
incomplete (eg-C<Seq>) type, and it is a supertype of the other.  This
function's 2 parameters are mutually commutative.

=item C<function sys.Core.Universal.is_not_identical result Bool params {
topic(Universal), other(Universal) }>

This function is exactly the same as C<sys.Core.Universal.is_identical>
except that it results in the opposite boolean value when given the same
arguments.

=item C<function sys.Core.Universal.is_value_of_type result Bool params {
topic(Universal), type(Cat.NameChain) }>

This function results in C<Bool:true> iff the value of its C<topic>
argument is a member of the data type whose name is given in the C<type>
argument, and C<Bool:false> otherwise.  As trivial cases, this function
always results in C<Bool:true> if the named type is C<Universal>, and
C<Bool:false> if it is C<Empty>.  This function will fail if the named type
doesn't exist in the virtual machine.

=item C<function sys.Core.Universal.treated result Universal params {
topic(Universal), as(Cat.NameChain) }>

This function results in the value of its C<topic> argument, but that the
declared type of the result is the not-C<Empty> data type whose name is
given in the C<as> argument.  This function will fail if the named type
doesn't exist in the virtual machine, or if C<topic> isn't a member of the
named type.  The purpose of C<treated> is to permit taking values from a
context having a more generic declared type, and using them in a context
having a more specific declared type; such an action would otherwise be
blocked at compile time due to a type-mismatch error; C<treated> causes the
type-mismatch validation, and possible failure, to happen at runtime
instead, on the actual value rather than declared value.  For example, if
you are storing an C<Int> value in a C<Scalar>-typed variable, using
C<treated> will cause the compiler to let you use that variable as an
argument to C<Int.sum>, which it otherwise wouldn't.

=item C<function sys.Core.Universal.default result Universal params {
of(Cat.NameChain) }>

This function results in the default value of the not-C<Empty> data type
whose name is given in the C<of> argument, and the declared type of the
result is that same type.  This function will fail if the named type
doesn't exist in the virtual machine, either at compile or runtime
depending whether the type is in the system or user namespace.  This
function is conceptually implicitly used to provide default values for
variables, so they always hold valid values of their declared type.

=back

=head1 SYSTEM-DEFINED GENERIC ORDERED FUNCTIONS

These functions are applicable to values of potentially any data type,
those which have a C<comparison> or such function defined for them.  They
provide a common syntax for sort-related functionality, though technically
every type having these functions is re-implementing its own version.  If
values of an ordered data type can conceivably be sorted using multiple
criteria (such as different text collations), then these functions just
represent the default criteria; any additional criteria are represented by
additional functions declared for just the types they apply to.

=over

=item C<function sys.Core.Ordered.is_before result Bool params {
topic(Universal), other(Universal) }>

This function results in C<Bool:true> iff its 2 arguments are non-identical
and the value of the C<topic> argument is considered to come before the
value of the C<other> argument when the 2 values are arranged in order (as
defined by the type); it results in C<Bool:false> otherwise.  This
function's arguments must be of compatible declared types; in this case, 2
declared types are compatible iff they are both subtypes of a common scalar
type that declares a C<comparison> function for itself.  Note that
C<is_before> is considered the only fundamental ordered-specific operator,
and all others are defined over it plus C<is_identical>.

=item C<function sys.Core.Ordered.is_not_before result Bool params {
topic(Universal), other(Universal) }>

This function is exactly the same as C<sys.Core.Ordered.is_before> except
that it results in the opposite boolean value when given the same
arguments.  (It could alternately be called "is after or is identical".)

=item C<function sys.Core.Ordered.is_inside_range result Bool params {
topic(Universal), min(Universal), max(Universal), min_is_inside(Bool),
max_is_inside(Bool) }>

This function results in C<Bool:true> iff its C<topic> argument is within
the range whose bounds are defined by its C<min> and C<max> arguments.  If
C<min_is_inside> or C<max_is_inside> are C<Bool:true>, then C<topic> is
considered to be within the range if it is equal to C<min> or C<max>,
respectively.  This function's arguments must be of compatible declared
types as per C<sys.Core.Ordered.is_before>.  This function will fail if
C<max> is before C<min>.

=item C<function sys.Core.Ordered.is_outside_range result Bool params {
topic(Universal), min(Universal), max(Universal), min_is_inside(Bool),
max_is_inside(Bool) }>

This function is exactly the same as C<sys.Core.Ordered.is_inside_range>
except that it results in the opposite boolean value when given the same
arguments.

=item C<function sys.Core.Ordered.min result Universal params {
topic(Set) }>

This function is a reduction operator that recursively takes each pair of
its N input element values and picks the minimum of the 2 (a process which
is both commutative and associative) until just one is left, which is the
function's result.  If C<topic> has zero values, then C<min> results in the
result type's concept of positive infinity, which is the identity value for
I<min>.  This function will fail on a C<topic> of zero values if the result
type's concept of positive infinity is impossible or impractically large to
represent, such as with the infinite C<Text> type.

=item C<function sys.Core.Ordered.max result Universal params {
topic(Set) }>

This function is exactly the same as C<sys.Core.Ordered.min> except that it
results in the maximum input element value rather than the minimum one, and
its identity value is the result type's concept of negative infinity.

=item C<function sys.Core.Ordered.maybe_min result Maybe params {
topic(Set) }>

This function is exactly the same as C<sys.Core.Ordered.min> except that it
results in a C<Maybe> of what is otherwise the result type, and that result
has zero elements if the argument has zero elements.

=item C<function sys.Core.Ordered.maybe_max result Maybe params {
topic(Set) }>

This function is to C<sys.Core.Ordered.max> as
C<sys.Core.Ordered.maybe_min> is to C<sys.Core.Ordered.min>.

=back

=head1 SYSTEM-DEFINED CORE GENERIC QUASI- FUNCTIONS

I<This documentation is pending.>

=head1 SYSTEM-DEFINED CORE CATALOG FUNCTIONS

I<This documentation is pending.>

=head1 SYSTEM-DEFINED CORE UPDATERS

=head2 Generic Universal

These update operators are applicable to values of any data type at all.

=over

=item C<updater sys.Core.Universal.assign update { target(Universal) } read
{ v(Universal) }>

This update operator will update the variable supplied as its C<target>
argument so that it holds the value supplied as its C<v> argument.  This
update operator's arguments must be of compatible declared types; in this
case, C<v> must be a subtype of C<target>.

=back

=head1 SYSTEM-DEFINED CORE SYSTEM SERVICES

These system services are applicable to just one or more specific
system-defined core scalar data type.

I<This documentation is pending.>

=head1 SYSTEM-DEFINED CORE PROCEDURES

=head2 Generic Control-Flow Procedures

These procedures are applicable to use in all kinds of procedures.

=over

=item C<procedure sys.Core.Control.fail update {} read {
topic(Cat.Exception) }>

This procedure will throw the exception given as its argument; this results
in the call stack unwinding, and transaction rollbacks, until it is caught.

=item C<procedure sys.Core.Control.try_catch update { try_updating(Tuple),
catch_updating(Tuple) } read { try(Cat.NameChain), catch(Cat.NameChain),
try_assuming(Tuple), catch_assuming(Tuple) }>

This procedure invokes the procedure named in its C<try> argument, giving
it the arguments C<try_updating> and C<try_assuming> as its C<updating> and
C<assuming> arguments, respectively.  If the C<try> procedure throws an
exception, then any state changes it made roll back (but changes made
before that don't), and the call stack unwinds to the C<try_catch> itself;
then the procedure named by C<catch> is invoked similarly to C<try> was,
with corresponding arguments, but with the extra read-only argument
C<topic> whose value is a C<Cat.Exception>; if the C<catch> procedure also
throws an exception (such as to say its not handling the thrown one), then
that one is not caught and the call stack unwinding plus applicable
transaction rollback carries on to the caller of the C<try_catch>.  If the
C<try> procedure succeeds (doesn't throw an exception), then the C<catch>
procedure is not called.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

Go to L<Language::MuldisD> for the majority of distribution-internal
references, and L<Language::MuldisD::SeeAlso> for the majority of
distribution-external references.

=head1 AUTHOR

Darren Duncan (C<perl@DarrenDuncan.net>)

=head1 LICENSE AND COPYRIGHT

This file is part of the formal specification of the Muldis D language.

Muldis D is Copyright © 2002-2008, Darren Duncan.

See the LICENSE AND COPYRIGHT of L<Language::MuldisD> for details.

=head1 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS in L<Language::MuldisD> apply to this file too.

=cut
