=pod

=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

Muldis::D::Core::Attributive -
Muldis D generic attributive operators

=head1 VERSION

This document is Muldis::D::Core::Attributive version 0.140.0.

=head1 PREFACE

This document is part of the Muldis D language specification, whose root
document is L<Muldis::D>; you should read that root document before
you read this one, which provides subservient details.  Moreover, you
should read the L<Muldis::D::Core> document before this current
document, as that forms its own tree beneath a root document branch.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes essentially all of the core Muldis D generic
operators that types composed of named attributes would have.  In
particular, all the virtual operators that tuples and relations implement.

I<This documentation is pending.>

=head1 VIRTUAL FUNCTIONS FOR THE ATTRIBUTIVE MIXIN TYPE

=head2 sys.std.Core.Attributive.degree

C<< function degree (NNInt <-- topic@ : Attributive) {...} >>

This virtual function results in the degree of its argument (that is, the
count of attributes it has).

=head2 sys.std.Core.Attributive.is_nullary

C<< function is_nullary (Bool <-- topic@ : Attributive) {...} >>

This virtual function results in C<Bool:True> iff its argument has a degree
of zero (that is, it has zero attributes), and C<Bool:False> otherwise.

=head2 sys.std.Core.Attributive.is_not_nullary

C<< function is_not_nullary (Bool <-- topic@ : Attributive) {...} >>

This virtual function is exactly the same as
C<sys.std.Core.Attributive.is_nullary> except
that it results in the opposite boolean value when given the same argument.

=head2 sys.std.Core.Attributive.has_attrs

C<< function has_attrs (Bool <-- topic@ : Attributive,
attr_names : set_of.Name) {...} >>

This virtual function results in C<Bool:True> iff, for every one of the
attribute names specified by its C<attr_names> argument, its C<topic>
argument has an attribute with that name; otherwise it results in
C<Bool:False>.  As a trivial case, this function's result is C<Bool:True>
if C<attr_names> is empty.

=head2 sys.std.Core.Attributive.attr_names

C<< function attr_names (set_of.Name <-- topic@ : Attributive) {...} >>

This virtual function results in the set of the names of the attributes of
its argument.

=head2 sys.std.Core.Attributive.rename

C<< function rename (Attributive <-- topic@ : Attributive,
map : AttrRenameMap) {...} >>

I<TODO: This description; meanwhile, see the implementers' descriptions.>
Note that this operation is also known as C<< {<-} >>.

=head2 sys.std.Core.Attributive.projection

C<< function projection (Attributive <-- topic@ : Attributive,
attr_names : set_of.Name) {...} >>

I<TODO: This description; meanwhile, see the implementers' descriptions.>
Note that this operation is also known as C<{}>.

=head2 sys.std.Core.Attributive.cmpl_proj

C<< function cmpl_proj (Attributive <-- topic@ : Attributive,
attr_names : set_of.Name) {...} >>

I<TODO: This description; meanwhile, see the implementers' descriptions.>
Note that this operation is also known as C<{!}>.

=head2 sys.std.Core.Attributive.static_exten

C<< function static_exten (Attributive <--
topic@ : Attributive, attrs : Tuple) {...} >>

I<TODO: This description; meanwhile, see the implementers' descriptions.>

=head2 sys.std.Core.Attributive.wrap

C<< function wrap (Attributive <-- topic@ : Attributive,
outer : Name, inner : set_of.Name) {...} >>

I<TODO: This description; meanwhile, see the implementers' descriptions.>
Note that this operation is also known as C<< {%<-} >>.

=head2 sys.std.Core.Attributive.cmpl_wrap

C<< function cmpl_wrap (Attributive <-- topic@ : Attributive,
outer : Name, cmpl_inner : set_of.Name) {...} >>

I<TODO: This description; meanwhile, see the implementers' descriptions.>
Note that this operation is also known as C<< {%<-!} >>.

=head2 sys.std.Core.Attributive.unwrap

C<< function unwrap (Attributive <-- topic@ : Attributive,
inner : set_of.Name, outer : Name) {...} >>

I<TODO: This description; meanwhile, see the implementers' descriptions.>
Note that this operation is also known as C<< {<-%} >>.

=head1 VIRTUAL UPDATERS FOR THE ATTRIBUTIVE MIXIN TYPE

=head1 Updaters That Rename Attributes

=head2 sys.std.Core.Attributive.assign_rename

C<updater assign_rename (&topic@ : Attributive, map : AttrRenameMap) {...}>

This virtual update operator is a short-hand for first invoking the
C<sys.std.Core.Attributive.rename> function with the same arguments, and
then assigning the result of that function to C<topic>.

=head1 Updaters That Add Attributes

=head2 sys.std.Core.Attributive.assign_static_exten

C<updater assign_static_exten (&topic@ : Attributive, attrs : Tuple) {...}>

This virtual update operator is a short-hand for first invoking the
C<sys.std.Core.Attributive.static_exten> function with the same arguments,
and then assigning the result of that function to C<topic>.

=head1 Updaters That Remove Attributes

=head2 sys.std.Core.Attributive.assign_projection

C<updater assign_projection (&topic@ : Attributive,
attr_names : set_of.Name) {...}>

This virtual update operator is a short-hand for first invoking the
C<sys.std.Core.Attributive.projection> function with the same arguments,
and then assigning the result of that function to C<topic>.

=head2 sys.std.Core.Attributive.assign_cmpl_proj

C<updater assign_cmpl_proj (&topic@ : Attributive,
attr_names : set_of.Name) {...}>

This virtual update operator is a short-hand for first invoking the
C<sys.std.Core.Attributive.cmpl_proj> function with the same arguments,
and then assigning the result of that function to C<topic>.

=head1 SEE ALSO

Go to L<Muldis::D> for the majority of distribution-internal
references, and L<Muldis::D::SeeAlso> for the majority of
distribution-external references.

=head1 AUTHOR

Darren Duncan (C<darren@DarrenDuncan.net>)

=head1 LICENSE AND COPYRIGHT

This file is part of the formal specification of the Muldis D language.

Muldis D is Copyright © 2002-2010, Muldis Data Systems, Inc.

See the LICENSE AND COPYRIGHT of L<Muldis::D> for details.

=head1 TRADEMARK POLICY

The TRADEMARK POLICY in L<Muldis::D> applies to this file too.

=head1 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS in L<Muldis::D> apply to this file too.

=cut
