=pod

=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

Muldis::D::Core::Stringy -
Muldis D generic stringy operators

=head1 VERSION

This document is Muldis::D::Core::Stringy version 0.126.0.

=head1 PREFACE

This document is part of the Muldis D language specification, whose root
document is L<Muldis::D>; you should read that root document before
you read this one, which provides subservient details.  Moreover, you
should read the L<Muldis::D::Core> document before this current
document, as that forms its own tree beneath a root document branch.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes essentially all of the core Muldis D
stringy operators, essentially all the generic ones that a
typical programming language should have.

I<This documentation is pending.>

=head1 VIRTUAL FUNCTIONS FOR THE STRINGY MIXIN TYPE

=head2 sys.std.Core.Stringy.catenation

C<< function sys.std.Core.Stringy.catenation (Stringy <--
$topic@ : array_of.Stringy) {...} >>

This virtual function results in the catenation of the N element values of
its argument; it is a reduction operator that recursively takes each
consecutive pair of input values and catenates (which is associative) them
together until just one is left, which is the result.  Conceptually, if
C<topic> has zero values, then C<catenation> results in the empty string or
empty sequence, which is the identity value for catenation; however, while
each implementing function of C<catenation> could actually result in a
type-specific value of the empty string or empty sequence, this virtual
function itself will instead fail when C<topic> has zero values, because
then it would lack the necessary type information to know which
type-specific implementing function to dispatch to.  Note that this
operation is also known as C<~>.

=head2 sys.std.Core.Stringy.replication

C<< function sys.std.Core.Stringy.replication (Stringy <--
$topic@ : Stringy, $count : NNInt) {...} >>

This virtual function results in the catenation of C<count> instances of
C<topic>.  Note that this operation is also known as C<x>.

=head1 SEE ALSO

Go to L<Muldis::D> for the majority of distribution-internal
references, and L<Muldis::D::SeeAlso> for the majority of
distribution-external references.

=head1 AUTHOR

Darren Duncan (C<darren@DarrenDuncan.net>)

=head1 LICENSE AND COPYRIGHT

This file is part of the formal specification of the Muldis D language.

Muldis D is Copyright © 2002-2010, Muldis Data Systems, Inc.

See the LICENSE AND COPYRIGHT of L<Muldis::D> for details.

=head1 TRADEMARK POLICY

The TRADEMARK POLICY in L<Muldis::D> applies to this file too.

=head1 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS in L<Muldis::D> apply to this file too.

=cut
