=pod

=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

Muldis::D::Package::Muldis_D::Plain_Text -
Muldis D Plain Text source code parsers and generators

=head1 VERSION

This document is Muldis::D::Package::Muldis_D::Plain_Text version 0.200.1.

=head1 PREFACE

This document is part of the Muldis D language specification, whose root
document is L<Muldis::D>; you should read that root document
before you read this one, which provides subservient details.

=head1 SYNOPSIS

I<TODO.>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document defines the Muldis D Plain Text package
C<Muldis_D::Plain_Text:"http://muldis.com":"0.200.1"> which provides the
reference implementations of parsers and generators for Muldis D Plain Text
source code, mainly in the form of functions that map Muldis D C<Text>
values containing such with Muldis D C<Package> values.

Note that for brevity this document will use the unqualified term
I<argument> to refer to a function's conceptual argument that is actually
an attribute of a I<FDN__Tuple_Inf> typed actual argument; the latter will
be qualified as I<topic> in the rarer circumstance where that is meant.

=head1 PACKAGES

    Muldis_D:Plain_Text:"http://muldis.com":"0.200.1";
    script ASCII;
    package
    {
        identity MDPT ::= Muldis_D::Plain_Text:"http://muldis.com":"0.200.1";
        foundation "http://muldis.com":"0.200.1";
        uses MD ::= Muldis_D:"http://muldis.com":"0.200.1";
        floating {::MD, ::MD::Source_Code, ::MDPT};
        ...
    };

=head1 SOURCE CODE PARSING AND GENERATING ROUTINES

I<TODO.>

I<Also missing are functions to scan Blobs to determine character encoding
in order to arrive at a Text,
and declared normalization given by 'script'.>

=head2 Text_looks_like_MDPT

    ::MDPT::Text_looks_like_MDPT ::= function --> Boolean <-- (Text) ...;

I<TODO.>

=head2 parse_Text_as_MDPT

    ::MDPT::parse_Text_as_MDPT ::= function --> Package_List <-- (Text) ...;

I<TODO.>

=head2 generate_MDPT_as_Text

    ::MDPT::generate_MDPT_as_Text ::= function --> Text <-- (Package_List) ...;

I<TODO.>

=head1 SOURCE CODE DECORATION DATA TYPES

I<TODO.>

=head2 Plain_Text_Decoration

    ::MDPT::Plain_Text_Decoration::"" ::= interface
        composes Decoration;

I<TODO.>

=head1 SEE ALSO

Go to L<Muldis::D> for the majority of distribution-internal
references, and L<Muldis::D::See_Also> for the majority of
distribution-external references.

=head1 AUTHOR

Darren Duncan (C<darren@DarrenDuncan.net>)

=head1 LICENSE AND COPYRIGHT

This file is part of the formal specification of the Muldis D language.

Muldis D is Copyright © 2002-2015, Muldis Data Systems, Inc.

See the LICENSE AND COPYRIGHT of L<Muldis::D> for details.

=head1 TRADEMARK POLICY

The TRADEMARK POLICY in L<Muldis::D> applies to this file too.

=head1 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS in L<Muldis::D> apply to this file too.

=cut
