=pod

=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

Language::MuldisD::Ext::Text -
Muldis D extension for character string data types and operators

=head1 VERSION

This document is Language::MuldisD::Ext::Text version 0.19.1.

=head1 PREFACE

This document is part of the Muldis D language specification, whose root
document is L<Language::MuldisD>; you should read that root document
before you read this one, which provides subservient details.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Muldis D has a mandatory core set of system-defined (eternally available)
entities, which is referred to as the I<Muldis D core> or the I<core>; they
are the minimal entities that all Muldis D implementations need to provide;
they are mutually self-describing and are used to bootstrap the language;
any entities outside the core, called I<Muldis D extensions>, are
non-mandatory and are defined in terms of the core or each other, but the
reverse isn't true.

This current C<Text> document describes the system-defined I<Muldis D Text
Extension>, which consists of character string data types and operators,
essentially all the generic ones that a typical programming language should
have, but for the bare minimum needed for bootstrapping Muldis D, which are
defined in the language core instead.

This current document does not describe the polymorphic operators that all
types, or some types including core types, have defined over them; said
operators are defined once for all types in L<Language::MuldisD::Core>.

I<This documentation is pending.>

=head1 TYPE SUMMARY

Also for convenience are the regular set|maybe|seq|bag types
C<sys.Text.Spec.(Set|Maybe|Seq|Bag)OfText>.

I<This documentation is pending.>

=head1 SYSTEM-DEFINED TEXT-CONCERNING DATA TYPES

=item C<sys.Text.Spec.(Set|Maybe|Seq|Bag)OfText>

A C<(Set|Maybe|Seq|Bag)OfText> is a completely defined proper subtype of
C<(Set|Maybe|Seq|Bag)> whose C<value> attribute has a declared type of a
C<Text> subtype.

=head1 SYSTEM-DEFINED TEXT-CONCERNING FUNCTIONS

These functions implement commonly used character string operations.

=over

=item C<function sys.Text.Text.catenation result Text params {
topic(SeqOfText) }>

This function results in the catenation of the N element values of its
argument; it is a reduction operator that recursively takes each
consecutive pair of input values and catenates (which is associative) them
together until just one is left, which is the result.  If C<topic> has zero
values, then C<catenate> results in the empty string value, which is the
identity value for catenate.

=item C<function sys.Text.Text.repeat result Text params { topic(Text),
count(UInt) }>

This function results in the catenation of C<count> instances of C<topic>.

=item C<function sys.Text.Text.length_in_nfd_graphs result UInt params {
topic(Text) }>

This function results in the length of its argument in Unicode
Normalization Form D graphemes.

=item C<function sys.Text.Text.length_in_nfc_graphs result UInt params {
topic(Text) }>

This function results in the length of its argument in Unicode
Normalization Form C graphemes.

=item C<function sys.Text.Text.length_in_nfd_codes result UInt params {
topic(Text) }>

This function results in the length of its argument in Unicode
Normalization Form D code points.

=item C<function sys.Text.Text.length_in_nfc_codes result UInt params {
topic(Text) }>

This function results in the length of its argument in Unicode
Normalization Form C code points.

=item C<function sys.Text.Text.is_substr result Bool params {
look_in(Text), look_for(Text), fixed_start(Bool), fixed_end(Bool) }>

This function results in C<Bool:true> iff its C<look_for> argument is a
substring of its C<look_in> argument as per the optional C<fixed_start> and
C<fixed_end> constraints, and C<Bool:false> otherwise.  If C<fixed_start>
or C<fixed_end> are C<Bool:true>, then C<look_for> must occur right at the
start or end, respectively, of C<look_in> in order for C<contains> to
result in C<Bool:true>; if either flag is C<Bool:false>, its additional
constraint doesn't apply.

=item C<function sys.Text.Text.is_not_substr result Bool params {
look_in(Text), look_for(Text), fixed_start(Bool), fixed_end(Bool) }>

This function is exactly the same as C<sys.Text.Text.is_substr> except that
it results in the opposite boolean value when given the same arguments.

=item C<function sys.Text.Text.case_folded_to_upper result Text {
topic(Text) }>

This function results in the transformation of its argument where any
letters considered to be (small) lowercase are folded to (capital)
uppercase.

=item C<function sys.Text.Text.case_folded_to_lower result Text {
topic(Text) }>

This function results in the transformation of its argument where any
letters considered to be (capital) uppercase are folded to (small)
lowercase.

=item C<function sys.Text.Text.whitespace_trimmed result Text { topic(Text)
}>

This function results in the value of its argument but that any leading or
trailing whitespace characters are trimmed.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

Go to L<Language::MuldisD> for the majority of distribution-internal
references, and L<Language::MuldisD::SeeAlso> for the majority of
distribution-external references.

=head1 AUTHOR

Darren Duncan (C<perl@DarrenDuncan.net>)

=head1 LICENSE AND COPYRIGHT

This file is part of the formal specification of the Muldis D language.

Muldis D is Copyright © 2002-2008, Darren Duncan.

See the LICENSE AND COPYRIGHT of L<Language::MuldisD> for details.

=head1 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS in L<Language::MuldisD> apply to this file too.

=cut
