=pod

=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

Muldis::D::Ext::Spatial -
Muldis D extension for spatial data types and operators

=head1 VERSION

This document is Muldis::D::Ext::Spatial version 0.61.0.

=head1 PREFACE

This document is part of the Muldis D language specification, whose root
document is L<Muldis::D>; you should read that root document
before you read this one, which provides subservient details.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Muldis D has a mandatory core set of system-defined (eternally available)
entities, which is referred to as the I<Muldis D core> or the I<core>; they
are the minimal entities that all Muldis D implementations need to provide;
they are mutually self-describing and are used to bootstrap the language;
any entities outside the core, called I<Muldis D extensions>, are
non-mandatory and are defined in terms of the core or each other, but the
reverse isn't true.

This current C<Spatial> document describes the system-defined I<Muldis D
Spatial Extension>, which consists of spatial and/or geometric data types
and operators.

This current document does not describe the polymorphic operators that all
types, or some types including core types, have defined over them; said
operators are defined once for all types in L<Muldis::D::Core>.

I<This documentation is pending.>

=head1 TYPE SUMMARY

Following are all the data types described in this document, arranged in a
type graph according to their proper sub|supertype relationships (but that
the first 3 just reappear from the core set to provide a similar context,
and aren't re-described here):

    sys.std.Core.Type.Universal

        sys.std.Core.Type.Empty

        sys.std.Core.Type.QScalar
            sys.std.Core.Type.Scalar

                # The following are all regular non-ordered scalar types.

                sys.std.Spatial.Type.Geometry
                    sys.std.Spatial.Type.Point
                    sys.std.Spatial.Type.Curve
                        sys.std.Spatial.Type.LineString
                        sys.std.Spatial.Type.CircularString
                        sys.std.Spatial.Type.CompoundCurve
                    sys.std.Spatial.Type.Surface
                        sys.std.Spatial.Type.CurvePolygon
                            sys.std.Spatial.Type.Polygon
                    sys.std.Spatial.Type.GeometryCollection
                        sys.std.Spatial.Type.MultiPoint
                        sys.std.Spatial.Type.MultiCurve
                            sys.std.Spatial.Type.MultiLineString
                        sys.std.Spatial.Type.MultiSurface
                            sys.std.Spatial.Type.MultiPolygon

I<This documentation is pending.>

=head1 SYSTEM-DEFINED SPATIAL SCALAR DATA TYPES

These non-core scalar data types describe common kinds of spatial or
geometric figures.  I<Of course, dealing with these types in general isn't
a perfect science; they stand to be revised or rewritten.>

=head2 sys.std.Spatial.Type.Geometry

I<TODO.>

=head2 sys.std.Spatial.Type.Point

I<TODO.>

=head2 sys.std.Spatial.Type.Curve

I<TODO.>

=head2 sys.std.Spatial.Type.LineString

I<TODO.>

=head2 sys.std.Spatial.Type.CircularString

I<TODO.>

=head2 sys.std.Spatial.Type.CompoundCurve

I<TODO.>

=head2 sys.std.Spatial.Type.Surface

I<TODO.>

=head2 sys.std.Spatial.Type.CurvePolygon

I<TODO.>

=head2 sys.std.Spatial.Type.Polygon

I<TODO.>

=head2 sys.std.Spatial.Type.GeometryCollection

I<TODO.>

=head2 sys.std.Spatial.Type.MultiPoint

I<TODO.>

=head2 sys.std.Spatial.Type.MultiCurve

I<TODO.>

=head2 sys.std.Spatial.Type.MultiLineString

I<TODO.>

=head2 sys.std.Spatial.Type.MultiSurface

I<TODO.>

=head2 sys.std.Spatial.Type.MultiPolygon

I<TODO.>

=head1 SEE ALSO

Go to L<Muldis::D> for the majority of distribution-internal
references, and L<Muldis::D::SeeAlso> for the majority of
distribution-external references.

=head1 AUTHOR

Darren Duncan (C<perl@DarrenDuncan.net>)

=head1 LICENSE AND COPYRIGHT

This file is part of the formal specification of the Muldis D language.

Muldis D is Copyright © 2002-2009, Muldis Data Systems, Inc.

See the LICENSE AND COPYRIGHT of L<Muldis::D> for details.

=head1 TRADEMARK POLICY

The TRADEMARK POLICY in L<Muldis::D> applies to this file too.

=head1 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS in L<Muldis::D> apply to this file too.

=cut
